# Source: 石油贸易手册(1).pdf
# Extracted: 2026-04-14 10:15
# Characters: 1676618


--- Page 1/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
David Long, 
Editor 
WOODHEAD PUBLISHING LIMITED

--- Page 2/964 ---
How to go to your page: 
This eBook contains 18 sections. Each section has its own page 
numbering scheme, made up of an identifier and page number, separated by a slash. For example, to go to page 2 of section 2.8, type 2.8/2 in the �page 
#� box at the top of the screen a nd click �Go�. T 
o go to page 18 of 
section 17.2, type 17.2/8, and so forth.

--- Page 3/964 ---
Oil T rading Manual

--- Page 4/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 5/964 ---
OTM
Oil Trading Manual
Formerly edited by David Long 
Cambridge England

--- Page 6/964 ---
Published by W oodhead Publishing Ltd,
Abington Hall, Abington,
Cambridge CB1 6AH, England.
www.woodhead-publishing.com
First published 1995
Supplement 1 March 1996
Supplement 2 June 1996
Supplement 3 May 1997
Supplement 4 March 1998
Supplement 5 June 1998
Supplement 6 October 1998
Supplement 7 September 2000
Supplement 8 May 2002
© 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2002 Woodhead Publishing Ltd
Conditions of sale
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy
,
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A 
catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 1 85573 074 X
ISSN 1365 3210
Printed by Astron On-Line, Cambridgeshire, England

--- Page 7/964 ---
Contents
Contributors Abbreviations Introduction Acknowledgements Index 
Part 1: Characteristics
1 The trading of oil 
David Long 1.1 Why oil is traded 
1.2 Trading characteristics of oil 
1.3 Structure of the oil market 
2 Physical characteristics and reﬁning 
Hugh Quick 2.1 Introduction 
2.2 Uses of oil products 
2.3 Pricing 
2.4 Properties of oil products 
2.5 Crude oils 
2.6 Oil reﬁning 
2.7 Environmental factors 
2.8 Measurement, sampling and testing 
Appendix 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 8/964 ---
Contents
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
Catherine Hamer 3.1 Types of pricing mechanism
3.2 Fixed prices
3.3 Floating prices
3.4 Applying pricing mechanisms
3.5 Sources of price information
Part 2: Instruments and 
markets
4 Crude oil markets 
Petroleum Argus 4.1 Introduction
4.2 North Sea
4.3 Mediterranean
4.4 West Africa
4.5 United States
4.6 Middle East
4.7 Asia Paciﬁc
4.8 Latin America
Appendix
5 Product markets 
Petroleum Argus 5.1 Introduction
5.2 Europe
5.3 United States
5.4 Asia Paciﬁc
Appendix
6 Futures and forward contracts 
Sally Clubley & David Long 6.1 Introduction
6.2 What are futures and forward contracts?
6.3 The pricing of futures and forward contracts
6.4 How are futures and forward contracts used?
6.5 Conclusions
Supplement 8 May 2002 vi

--- Page 9/964 ---
Contents
7 Forward paper markets 
David Long 7.1 Introduction
7.2 Structure and organisation
7.3 Europe
7.4 United States
7.5 Arab Gulf and Far East
7.6 Future developments
Appendix
8 Oil futures exchanges 
Sally Clubley 8.1 Introduction
8.2 The oil futures exchanges
8.3 Delivery procedures
8.4 Options on oil futures
8.5 Clearing mechanisms
8.6 Future developments
9 Options 
David Knox 9.1 Introduction
9.2 What is an option?
9.3 Using options
9.4 Pricing options
Appendix
10 Swaps 
David Long 10.1 Introduction
10.2 What is a swap?
10.3 Pricing swaps
10.4 Using swaps
10.5 Future developments
Supplement 8 May 2002 vii

--- Page 10/964 ---
Contents
11 Long dated oil markets 
Frédéric Barnaud & Philippe Lautard 11.1 Introduction
11.2 Market participants
11.3 Market liquidity
11.4 Trading instruments
11.5 Pricing models
11.6 Contractual issues
11.7 Using long dated derivatives
11.8 Conclusions
Appendix
Part 3: Administration
12 Operations and logistics 
Robin Burley 12.1 Introduction
12.2 Scheduling
12.3 Bookouts
12.4 Nomination and documentation
12.5 Inspection
12.6 Demurrage
12.7 Shipping operations
12.8 Terminals, trans-shipment and storage
Appendix
13 Credit control 
Catherine Jago 13.1 Why is credit control necessary?
13.2 Assessing credit risk
13.3 Limiting ﬁnancial exposure
13.4 Methods of credit monitoring
Appendix
Supplement 8 May 2002
 viii

--- Page 11/964 ---
Contents
14 Accounting 
Hanif Barma, Rachel Leigh & Matthew Price 14.1 Introduction
14.2 Accounting guidance
14.3 General principles
14.4 Futures contracts
14.5 Forward contracts
14.6 Swaps
14.7 Options
14.8 Physical hedges
14.9 Disclosure requirements
14.10 Conclusions
15 Taxation of oil trading 
Phil Greatrex 15.1 Introduction
15.2 United Kingdom
15.3 United States
15.4 Singapore
15.5 United Kingdom taxation of trading 
instruments
15.6 The UK PRT nomination scheme
Appendix
16 Contracts 
Denton Hall 16.1 Introduction
16.2 General
16.3 Express terms
16.4 Implied terms
16.5 Incorporated terms
Appendix
17 Legal and regulatory issues 
Blanche Sas 17.1 Introduction
17.2 International
17.3 United States
17.4 United Kingdom
17.5 Singapore
Appendix
Supplement 8 May 2002 ix

--- Page 12/964 ---
Contents
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk 
Françoise Deshusses 18.1 Why risk control is important
18.2 Characteristics of the energy market
18.3 Valuation of trading positions
18.4 Determination of risk
18.5 Operations
18.6 Conclusions
Supplement 8 May 2002 x

--- Page 13/964 ---
Contributors
David Long David Long is a freelance consultant and writer specialising in the oil market. He writes two monthly newsletters commenting on trends in the oil market, Argus Fundamentals , published by 
Petroleum 
Argus Limited and the Monthly Oil Report , published 
by the Centre for Global Energy Studies (CGES) in London. He is also a regular contributor to the weekly Argus Global Markets 
and to the bimonthly CGES Global Oil Report . His interests 
include the development and application of new trading tech-niques in the oil industry and he has been involved in the pre-paration of training material on swaps and options and the development of computer software for analysing oil price behaviour
. 
David began his career with BP in 1977, where he worked 
in Corporate Planning and Supply Departments. He then spent two years on secondment at the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, studying the development of forward paper markets in oil, before joining the Institute as a Research Fellow from 1986 to 1989. While at the Institute he took part in research on the oil export policies of the former Soviet Union, the development of the European reﬁning industry
, and the behaviour of prices in the 
physical, forward and futures markets for gasoil in Europe. Julian Lee Julian Lee is an oil analyst at the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London. The CGES is an independent energy research centre founded in 1990 by Sheikh 
Yamani, former oil minister of 
Saudi Arabia. Julian writes research articles on a wide variety of subjects for the CGES’ publications, and appears regularly on the radio and television. He is particularly interested in develop-ments in the former Soviet Union and is the author of several reports on the subject. 
Before joining the CGES in 1990, Julian worked for Zambia 
Consolidated Copper Mines, where he was involved in work to 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 14/964 ---
Contributors
improve the operations of all areas of the company’ s business 
from extracting ore to exporting reﬁned copper. He has a ﬁrst class honours degree in Mathematics from the University of Warwick and an MSc in Operational Research from the London School of Economics and Political Science. 
Hugh Quick Hugh Quick is an independent consultant on oil reﬁning and supply
. He previously worked for Shell from 1956 to 1987, mainly 
in the Netherlands and the Far East, where he gained extensive experience of reﬁnery operations and all aspects of reﬁning and supply economics, in particular the planning and development of major projects, the management of the interface between reﬁn-ing and marketing, and reﬁnery performance evaluation. 
Since leaving Shell, Hugh has worked as an independent 
consultant and his main activities have included the evaluation of reﬁneries and sites for owners and potential investors, advice to lenders on major investment projects, and advice on the supply and reﬁning aspects of insurance claims. He studied Chemistry at Oxford University and attended the Harvard Business School. Catherine Jago (formerly Hamer) Catherine is a freelance consultant specialising in oil markets and oil trading. She has lectured on oil trading techniques and pricing all over the world and has acted as an oil expert, working with many of the top London ﬁrms of solicitors and barristers. Her recent work also includes studies on a variety of oil industry projects for consultants 
Arthur D. Little, MRC Oxford, Energy 
Listener and ICIS-LOR. 
Catherine has been involved in the international oil indus-
try since 1982. She began her career with BP Oil International in their T
rade and Supply Department, where she worked ﬁrst 
on forecasting and economic analysis and subsequently on pricing and operations for BP’s Antwerp and Rotterdam reﬁneries. She then moved to London Oil Reports (now part of the ICIS-LOR group) where she set up a new European Products report and also spent time in Houston studying the US crude and oil products markets. After this she joined Poten and Partners in London, working as a broker in the European and trans-Atlantic oil markets until 1989 when she became a freelance consultant. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xii

--- Page 15/964 ---
Contributors
Petroleum Argus Petroleum Argus is one of the leading primary sources of price information on the oil market. Founded in 1970 as Europ-Oil Prices, 
Argus published the ﬁrst ever daily crude market wire in 
1979 and Argus price reports now cover all the major markets for crude and reﬁned products and are widely used in the oil indus-try. Petroleum Argus also publishes a wide range of energy market newsletters, including W
eekly Petroleum Argus , Argus 
Global Markets and Argus Fundamentals which explore the 
wider forces driving the oil market. The front page editorials in Weekly Petroleum Argus and Argus Global Markets have built up 
a reputation for clear and insightful analysis of industry issues, frequently challenging the conventional wisdom. 
Argus was founded by Jan Nasmyth and is published by 
Adrian Binks. W
eekly Petroleum Argus is edited by Nick Black 
and Argus Global Markets is edited by Alan Kennington. The 
Argus contribution to the Oil Trading Manual was prepared by 
various members of staff, both past and present. The chapter on crude oil markets involved contributions from Isabella Kurek, Marie-Anne Gries, William Harwood, Daniel Massey, Alan McNee, Tim Mingee, Natasha Norton, Scott Nelson, David Pike, Mark Smedley and Emma Wenban-Smith. 
Sally Clubley Sally Clubley is an independent oil consultant specialising in price risk management in the energy industries. She is a faculty member of Invincible Energy
, an international training and con-
sultancy company, with whom she is involved in developing and presenting public courses and in-house seminars on all aspects of business risk in the oil, gas and electricity markets. She is the author of T
rading in Oil Futures and Options . 
David Knox David Knox is a director of Nations Bank-CRT and is based at their London ofﬁce. He is actively involved in the options market and specialises in developing new applications for OTC options and swaps. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xiii

--- Page 16/964 ---
Contributors
Frédéric Barnaud 
Frédéric Barnaud was responsible for risk management and derivatives research and development for Elf Trading SA in Geneva from 1992 to 1994. He previously spent ﬁfteen months on secondment to the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, where he conducted research on oil economics, and to the London Uni
-
versity City Business School, where he studied ﬁnancial and com-modity markets.
Frédéric qualiﬁed as an Ingénieur at the École Nationale des 
Ponts et Chaussées, Paris where he specialised in civil engineer-ing, applied mathematics and ﬁnance. Philippe Lautard Philippe Lautard is in charge of energy derivatives marketing for Elf T
rading SA in Geneva and deputy manager of Elf Trading’s 
Hedging and Derivatives Department. He joined Elf Trading in 1988 as a futures and options trader and helped to start up Elf Trading’s OTC activities. 
Philippe graduated in Civil Engineering from the École 
Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, Paris and Oil Economics from the Institut Français des Pétroles. Robin Burley Robin Burley is the founder of Kennet Oil Logistics, an inde-pendent consultancy engaged in advising companies on opera-tional procedures and strategy. 
Robin has extensive experience of the oil industry, including 
ten years with British Petroleum and ten years with Gulf Oil. During this time he held various management posts with repon-sibilities for supply economics, oil production joint ventures, supply
, trading and operations, ship management, chartering and 
ﬂeet planning, and logistics, storage and trans-shipment. He has worked abroad in Europe, the US and the Middle East, and has been involved in negotiating supply and logistics arrangements worldwide. Hanif Barma Hanif Barma is a Director at PricewaterhouseCoopers in their Global Energy and Mining practice. Hanif 
’s clients have included 
many upstream and downstream oil companies, and his work has 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xiv

--- Page 17/964 ---
Contributors
encompassed their oil trading activities. His work has included audit work, client training and advising clients on a range of due diligence, acquisition and privatisation assignments. Hanif is also responsible for energy industry training at Pricewater-houseCoopers. 
Hanif joined Price Waterhouse in 1983 and has specialised 
in accounting aspects of the oil and gas industry since 1986. Hanif was educated at the City University
, London and graduated with 
First Class Honours in 1983. He qualiﬁed as Chartered Accoun-tant in 1986. Rachel Leigh Rachel Leigh is a senior manager in the Market Risk business advisory service within the PricewaterhouseCoopers Banking and Capital Markets group. She is closely involved with the capital markets division of the group and has specialised knowl-edge of derivatives and ﬁnancial instrument accounting. This knowledge has been applied actively to energy and commodities clients’ 
trading portfolios for a number of years. 
Rachel joined PricewaterhouseCoopers in 1993 and has spe-
cialised in the capital markets division from that date. Rachel studied geography at Bristol University and graduated in 1993. She qualiﬁed as a Chartered 
Accountant in 1996. 
Matthew Price Matthew Price is a manager in the PricewaterhouseCoopers Banking and Capital Markets group. He is closely involved with the capital markets division of the group and has specialised knowledge of derivatives and ﬁnancial instrument accounting. This knowledge has been applied actively to investment banking and energy clients’ 
trading portfolios for a number of years. 
Matthew joined PricewaterhouseCoopers in 1995 and has 
specialised in the capital markets division from that date. Matthew studied mathematics at W
arwick University and gradu-
ated in 1995. He qualiﬁed as a Chartered Accountant in 1998. Philip Greatrex Phil Greatrex is managing director and a senior consultant at CW Energy T
ax Consultants Limited. He speaks regularly at con-
ferences on oil and gas tax matters and frequently contributes articles on oil taxation to various journals. He is author of the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xv

--- Page 18/964 ---
Contributors
taxation section of the United Kingdom Oil and Gas Law publi -
cation and has been secretary to the Brindex Tax subcommittee for many years. 
Phil qualiﬁed as a Chartered Accountant with Arthur Young 
in 1980 and transferred to their corporate tax department two years later. Since then he has specialised in oil tax matters for a variety of clients, both UK and international. In 1990 he left the merged ﬁrm of Ernst and Young to form, along with a number of colleagues, CW Energy Tax Consultants Limited. David Zimmerman & John S. Levin David Zimmerman is a Member of, and John S. Levin is Counsel to, the W
ashington D.C. law ﬁrm of Miller & Chevalier, Char-
tered. They and their colleagues have advised a number of large and small ﬁrms in the oil industry and related energy ﬁelds and represented them before the Inland Revenue Service and various courts with special emphasis on United States taxation. Alain Ahkong Alain Ahkong formed Pioneer Associates in 1990. He was for-merly the Singapore managing director of the international accountancy ﬁrm, 
Arthur Young. His previous career spanned 
sixteen years, of which six were spent in London specialising in tax in the oil and oil services industry and in the ﬁnancial ser -
vices sector. Blanche Sas Blanche Sas is head of Denton Hall’s Moscow ofﬁce. She spe-cialises in energy law, in particular: international and compara-tive law in relation to upstream petroleum regimes; downstream energy law – especially oil trading; energy sales contracts; pipeline law; privatisation and regulation of electricity and gas industries; and, in her current job, energy legislation in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. She is also the Editor of Oil 
and Gas Law and T
axation Review and the author of numerous 
publications on energy law. 
Blanche joined Denton Hall in 1991 and was previously 
Lecturer in Petroleum Law at the University of Dundee from 1985. She is a graduate of Dalhousie University (Canada) and the University of Dundee. She is a member of the International Bar Association. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xvi

--- Page 19/964 ---
Contributors
Françoise Deshusses Françoise Deshusses is head of commodity controlling for energy and base metals markets at the Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS) in Zurich. She has been involved in the development of reporting and control systems for the energy derivatives market since it ﬁrst began trading in the late 1980s. She studied economics at the University of Geneva and started her career in the oil industry with Elf T
rading. After leaving Elf, she worked 
in the crude oil department at Rhein Oel before joining UBS in 1993. At UBS she has been responsible for setting up and co-ordinating back-ofﬁce systems for energy and base metals markets. In her current post, she is responsible for evaluating the global risk exposure of UBS’ 
energy and base metals trading 
activities. 
Supplement 8 May 2002
 xvii

--- Page 20/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 21/964 ---
b/l Abbreviations
AAA American Arbitration Association ADP alternative delivery procedure AFBD Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers ANS Alaskan north slope crude AOT Approved Oil Traders (Singapore) API American Petroleum Institute APPI Asian Petroleum Price Index APO average price options ARA Antwerp-Rotterdam-Amsterdam area ARCH auto-regressive conditional heteroscedastic ASTM American Society for Testing Methods bl (or bbl) barrel (42 US gallons) bpcd barrels per calendar day bpsd barrels per stream day b/d barrels per day 
bill of lading 
C&F 
cost and freight ( see CFR ) 
CAA Clean Air Act (US) CARB California Air Resources Board CBOE Chicago Board Options Exchange CBOT Chicago Board of Trade CCR continuous catalyst regeneration CCU catalytic cracking unit CEA Commodity Exchange Act (US) CFD contract for differences CFPP cold ﬁlter plugging point CFR cost and freight ( see C&F ) 
CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission (US) CIF (or cif ) cost, insurance and freight CIP carriage and insurance paid to CISG Contracts for the International Sale of Goods COW crude oil washing CP charter-party document CPI consumer price index CPT carriage paid to Cristal Contract Regarding an Interim Supplement to 
Tanker Liability for Oil Pollution 
DAF 
delivered at frontier 
DDP delivered duty paid DDU delivered duty unpaid DEQ delivered ex-quay 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 22/964 ---
Abbreviations
DES	 delivered ex-ship 
DIN	 Deutsche Industrie Normal DPK	 dual purpose kerosine E&P	 exploration and production EdF	 Electricité de France EdP	 Electricidade de Portugal EEC	 European Economic Community (now EU) EFP	 exchange of futures for physical EFS	 exchange of futures for swaps ETA	 estimated time of arrival ETS	 Energy Trading System (IPE) EU	 European Union EXW	 ex-works FAS	 free alongside ship FBP	 ﬁnal boiling point FCA	 free carrier FCCU	 ﬂuid catalytic cracking unit FCPA	 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (US) FIP (or ﬁp)	 free in pipeline FOB (or fob) free on board FOD	 fuel oil doméstique FSA	 Financial Services Act (UK) FSU	 former Soviet Union FTA	 Futures Trading Act (Singapore) FTC	 Federal Trade Commission (US) GATT	 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GAAP	 Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GOM	 gas oil moteur GRM	 gross reﬁnery margin HSFO	 high sulphur fuel oil IBP	 initial boiling point ICC	 International Chamber of Commerce ICP	 Indonesian crude price ICSID	 International Centre for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes 
IEA	 International Energy Agency IGS	 inert gas system IOC	 Indian Oil Company IP	 Institute of Petroleum (UK) IPE	 International Petroleum Exchange (London) ISDA	 International Swaps and Derivatives Association LC	 letter of credit Libor	 London inter-bank offered rate LOI	 letter of indemnity 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xx

--- Page 23/964 ---
Abbreviations
LOOP Louisiana Off-shore Oil Port LOR London Oil Reports LPG liqueﬁed petroleum gas LSFO low sulphur fuel oil LSSR low sulphur straight run LSWR low sulphur waxy residue MMBTU million British Thermal Units MON motor octane number MPT modern portfolio theory MTBE methyl-tertiary-butyl-ether N+A naphthenes and aromatics NGL natural gas liquid NOR notice of readiness NWE north-west Europe NYH New York Harbor Nymex New York Mercantile Exchange OGLTR Oil and Gas Law and Taxation Review Opec Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries O/S open-speciﬁcation OSP ofﬁcial government selling price OTC over-the-counter OTO Ofﬁce of Oil Taxation (UK) Pb lead PONA parafﬁns, oleﬁns, naphthenes, and aromatics PPI producer price index ppm parts per million PRT Petroleum Revenue Tax (UK) PTIA Protection of Trading Interests Act (UK) RFG reformulated gasoline RON research octane number RVP Reid vapour pressure S&P Standard & Poor SFA Securities and Futures Association (UK) SFPP Santa Fe Paciﬁc Pipeline SG speciﬁc gravity SIA Sovereign Immunity Act (US) SIB Securities and Investments Board (UK) Simex Singapore International Monetary Exchange SRFO straight run fuel oil TEL tetra-ethyl lead TML tetra-methyl lead TOVALOP Tanker Owner’s Voluntary Agreement concerning 
Liability for Oil Pollution 
UAE 
United Arab Emirates 
Supplement 8 May 2002 xxi

--- Page 24/964 ---
Abbreviations
UCC Uniform Commercial Code (US)
UCP Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary
Credits 
UCTA Unfair Contract Terms Act (UK) UKCS United Kingdom continental shelf ULCC ultra-large crude carrier UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International 
Trade Law 
UPEI 
Union Pétrolière Européenne Indépendante 
USC United States Code VAR value at risk VGO vacuum gas oil VLCC very large crude carrier WTI west Texas intermediate crude WTS west Texas sour crude WS Worldscale 
Supplement 8 May 2002
 xxii

--- Page 25/964 ---
Introduction
The oil market is unique in its complexity and diversity. The scale is international and the trading instruments range from the physical to the ﬁnancial. As a result, the oil market has attracted the broadest possible set of participants: not only oil companies, but also banks, commodity traders, government agencies, ﬁnan-cial engineers, fund managers, ship owners, airlines, electricity utilities, chemical producers, and industrial conglomerates are all involved in the business of trading oil. 
And they, in turn, 
require the support of accountants, lawyers, tax experts, opera-tions specialists, business consultants and computer program-mers. The Oil T
 rading Manual is intended for them all. 
There are already many specialist books on individual sub-
jects such as futures trading or ﬁnancial derivatives, but these do not necessarily focus on oil. 
And there are others on account-
ing, taxation, contracts and regulation, but these rarely use oil as an example. 
At the same time, new participants in the oil 
market, such as bankers or fund managers, need to ﬁnd out about the operation of the physical oil market or discover what a reﬁn-ery does without serving an apprenticeship in the oil industry. Or
, those who are already in the oil business, may want to learn 
about new trading instruments such as options or swaps, or need to know what implications new oil trading techniques might have for accounting or taxation. The Oil Trading Manual therefore 
sets out to provide in one volume a common source of basic infor-mation on all aspects of oil trading that is accessible to everyone involved. 
The Manual is divided into three complementary parts. The 
ﬁrst, Characteristics, is an introduction to oil and oil trading, and includes material on the nature of oil as a commodity
, reﬁnery 
processes and the different ways in which oil is priced. The second, Instruments and Markets, deals with the oil market itself taking each segment in turn and explaining how the various trading instruments work and describing the markets that have evolved to trade them. It starts with the physical oil market, moving on to forward and futures markets, followed by options 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 26/964 ---
Introduction
and swaps. The third, Administration, covers the essential “back -
room” activities without which oil trading could not continue. It includes practical material on operations and logistics, credit control, accounting, taxation, contracts and regulation, providing a unique guide to the subject. Like all the W
oodhead Publishing 
commodity handbooks it will be updated regularly. I hope you ﬁnd it useful. 
David Long 
Editor 
xxiv Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 27/964 ---
Acknowledgements
Any book of this size must ultimately become a labour of love and the Oil Trading Manual is no exception. Like many large proj-
ects it has also taken longer than expected to get from the initial idea to the ﬁnished product. I would therefore like to thank those who have supported me throughout. Particular thanks go to my fellow contributors who have not only provided me with excellent material, but also updated it while waiting patiently for the Manual to be completed. 
And to Neil Wenborn, Martin Woodhead 
and Amanda Thomas at Woodhead Publishing who have been a constant source of enthusiasm. 
I would also like to thank those individuals and organisa-
tions that have generously provided me with advice and resources: Paul Newman and T
ony Dukes at Intercapital Com-
modity Brokers; Adrian Binks and the staff of Petroleum Argus; Nigel Harris, and Mary Jackson and Hugh Hagan at Saladin Computer Systems who kindly lent me a P
AWS system to ease 
the task of preparing the graphs. Also Julian Lee, who helped with the ﬁnal stages of production and has agreed to act as Asso-ciate Editor for future editions, and James Wood, who did the index at short notice. 
And ﬁnally, my family, who have put up 
with the long hours required to ﬁnish the job. 
DL 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 28/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 29/964 ---
1The trading of oil 
David Long 
1.1 Why oil is traded 
1.2 Trading characteristics of oil 
1.2.1 Transportation, processing and storage 
1.2.2 Demand, supply and stocks 
1.2.3 Not just another commodity 
1.3 Structure of the oil market 
1.3.1 Spectrum of instruments 
1.3.2 Trading horizons 
1.3.3 Interlocking markets

--- Page 30/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 31/964 ---
1.1 Why oil is traded 
Over the last twenty years oil has become the biggest commodity 
market in the world. During this period, oil trading has evolved 
from a primarily physical activity into a sophisticated financial 
market. In the process it has attracted the interest of a wide range 
of participants who now include banks and fund managers as well 
as the traditional oil majors, independents and physical oil traders. 
As well as being the largest commodity market in the world, oil 
is also the most complicated. The physical oil market trades many 
different types of crude oil and refined products, and the relative 
values of each grade are continually shifting in response to changes 
in supply and demand on both a global and a local scale. The 
industry has therefore developed a complex set of interlocking 
markets not only to establish prices across the entire spectrum of 
crude and product qualities, but also to enable buyers and sellers to 
accommodate changes in relative prices wherever they might occur. 
The initial momentum for the expansion of the oil market 
came from the changing structure of the oil industry. Prior to 1973, 
oil trading was a marginal activity for, most companies who only 
used the market to resolve any imbalances in supply and demand 
that might emerge. Trading volumes were typically small and 
usually spot, and prices were much less transparent than they are 
today. And the industry was dominated by large integrated oil 
companies that had little use for external markets either as a 
means of obtaining supplies or as a basis for setting prices. 
However, the structure of the oil industry changed irreversibly 
in the 1970s with the nationalisation of the upstream interests of 
the major oil companies in the Middle East and elsewhere, and 
trading became an essential component of any oil company's supply 
and marketing operations. Having lost access to large volumes of 
equity oil, the major oil companies were forced to buy at arm's 
length from their former host governments and the physical base of 
the international oil market expanded rapidly. With more oil being 
traded, external markets began to set the price for internal 
transfers as well as third-party sales and companies started to buy 
and sell oil if better opportunities existed outside their own supply 
network, fuelling the growth of the market. 
But the driving force behind the rapid growth in oil trading is 
the huge variability in the price of oil (see Fig. 1.1). Daily price 
movements of $l/barrel are not uncommon and prices frequently 
change by up to 50 centsharrel. Since there is no obvious upper or 
lower bound to oil prices, the value of a barrel of oil can double or 
Supplement 7 Sep 2000 1.lIpage 1

--- Page 32/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
40 
35 
30 
-2 2 25 f 
20 
15 
4 'I 1’ 
10 
1965 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 1.1 Crude oil prices, Nymex nearby WTI daily close 
halve within the space of a few months. As a result, everyone 
involved in the industry is exposed to the risk of very large changes 
in the value of any oil that they are producing, transporting, 
refining or purchasing, and a range of new markets have evolved in 
order to provide effective hedging instrumenk against the 
elaborate combination of absolute and relative price risks that 
characterise the oil business. This has not. only generated a very 
large volume of activity in its own right., but also attracted liquidity 
from other financial and commodity markets. 
l.l/page 2 Supplement 7 Sep 2000

--- Page 33/964 ---
1.2 Trading characteristics of oil 
Many of the characteristic features of the oil market are derived 
from the nature of oil itself. Despite the introduction of highly 
standardised paper trading instruments, oil remains a physical 
commodity. Like other primary commodity markets, the oil market 
is ultimately concerned with the transportation, processing and 
storage of an essential raw material as it travels from producer to 
consumer. However, this is a slow process, since crude oil may take 
several months to move from the well-head through the refinery to 
the sales pump. As a result, prices often change because the right 
oil is not in the right place at the right time. This is very different 
from the financial markets, where assets can be moved 
instantaneously from one location to another if required. 
1.2.1 Transportation, processing and storage 
One of the most important characteristics of oil is that it is a liquid 
(see Chapter 2). As a liquid, it requires specialised handling 
facilities for transportation, processing and storage. And it is these 
elements that provide the basic building blocks for the physical oil 
market. 
Transportation 
Oil is transported either in ships or pipelines. In the international 
market, oil moves almost exclusively in ships and it is therefore the 
size of the ship that forms the basic trading unit. In the case of 
crude oil, quantities are typically large and usually depend on the 
capacity of the loading and discharge terminals, the length of the 
voyage and the relative cost of shipping. In the North Sea, which is 
the most active waterborne crude market in the world, 500,000 
barrel cargoes are the norm. But for longer-haul crudes from West 
Africa or the Middle East, oil often moves in very large crude 
carriers (VLCCs) which can take up to 2 million barrels at a time. 
As a result, the scale of financial exposure associated with crude oil 
trading can be very large indeed. 
Refined products, however, are usually traded in much smaller 
quantities. Long distance movements may involve shiprnent.s as 
large as 60,000 tonnes (about 500,000 barrels, depending on the 
type of product); but most of the international trade is conducted in 
smaller vessels holding 20-30,000 tonnes. And many of the most 
active product markets deal in much smaller, barge-sized 
1.2lpage 1

--- Page 34/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
quantities, of between 1,000 and 5,000 tonnes. Since products are 
usually traded ex-refinery and often sold to wholesale distributors 
who may not have the capacity to receive or store very large 
quantities, the basic trading unit needs to be much smaller than in 
the international crude market. 
As well as fixing the size of trading unit, the method of 
transport often determines the terms of trade. Crude oil is usually 
sold close to the point of production and title is transferred as the 
oil flows from the loading terminal into the ship. Once loaded, 
however, the oil can either be traded on the water or at the point of 
discharge. As a result, the same cargo of oil may be priced 
differently depending on the point of sale. Refined products are 
traded on a variety of terms depending on local circumstances, but 
it is important to realise that several markets can co-exist for the 
same product at the same location with prices that reflect different 
delivery arrangements or parcel sizes. 
Oil is also transported and traded via pipelines. The most 
important pipeline markets are in the US where access is 
guaranteed in law to those who want to use them. In most cases oil 
is traded on a rateable basis -a specified number of barrels per day 
over an agreed period such as a fortnight or a month -and the oil 
is sold free-in-pipeline (fip) at designated locations. But in the case 
of West Texas Intermediate, which forms the basis of the Nymex 
Light Sweet Crude futures contract, oil is also sold in multiples of 
1,000 barrels available from or delivered into storage facilities at 
Cushing, Oklahoma. 
Processing 
Oil is not normally used in its raw state. Crude oil must be 
processed through a refinery in order to turn it into a marketable 
product such as gasoline, heating oil or fuel oil. The only exception 
is low sulphur crude oil which is sometimes burnt directly in power 
stations. Oil is therefore traded twice, first as a refinery feedstock, 
and secondly as a finished product. Although crude and product 
markets have rather different characteristics, they are inextricably 
linked by the technology and economics of refinery processes. 
Crude oil markets operate between the producer and the 
refiner. The characteristics and behaviour of the crude oil market 
therefore depend on the preferences and needs of the refiner as well 
as the composition and nature of the supply. Because there are 
many different types of crude oil, their relative value depends on 
the mix of products that can be obtained fi-om them. In general, 
crudes that yield a higher proportion of the more valuable light 
products such as gasoline, naphtha, kerosine and heating oil can

--- Page 35/964 ---
1 The trading of oil 
command a higher price than those which have a high yield of 
residual fuel oil. But there is no objective method of assessing the 
price of a given crude since every refinery has a different 
configuration and its market value will depend on who is bidding at 
the time. And refiners in different regions may have very different 
views about the price they are prepared to pay. 
Product markets operate between the refiner and the blender 
or wholesaler. They are usually much more localised than crude oil 
markets, since most refineries are positioned close to the end-user, 
and their process facilities are tailored to the needs of the local 
consumer. As a result, refined product prices can differ 
significantly from one market to another, reflecting the local 
structure of demand for the various petroleum products, the 
configuration of the refineries, and the regional product quality 
specifications. 
Storage 
Oil must also be stored on its journey fkom the well-head to the 
pump. As oil is a liquid, this requires the construction of specialised 
storage tanks at every stage in the supply chain. Stocks are 
necessary in any business that produces, manufactures and 
markets a physical commodity such as oil, and fluctuations in the 
level of stocks held at different points along the supply chain play 
an important role in determining the behaviour of prices in the oil 
market. But holding stocks is also costly since it ties up cash and 
storage facilities are expensive to rent or build. Oil companies 
therefore try to keep their stocks as near to the minimum operating 
level as circumst.ances allow. 
A surprisingly large amount of oil is required simply to fill the 
supply chain from well-head to customer. In addition, stocks are 
needed to keep the system flowing since deliveries are usually 
made in discrete quantities and stocks are run down in the 
intervening period. Also, companies need to hold extra stocks as an 
insurance policy against unexpected interruptions in supply or 
increases in demand from their customers. And finally, companies 
often build up (or run down) stocks for purely specul at'ive reasons 
either to profit from an upward price trend or to minimise the 
losses from a downward price trend. 
1.2.2 Demand, supply and stocks 
The behaviour of prices in any primary commodity market is 
strongly influenced by the fundamental forces of demand and 
supply. Although prices frequently change for other more 
1.2lpage 3

--- Page 36/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
78 
76 
74 
72 
u 70B 
5 68.---.-
66 
64 
62 
60 
58 
1085 1087 1089 1091 1093 1095 1097 1099 
Source: IEA 
Figure 1.2 Seasonality of world oil demand 
ephemeral reasons, especially now that trading screens and on-line 
news services play such an important role in the day-to-day 
operation of the oil market, the role of fundament.als in shaping the 
course of prices should not be forgotten. 
Demand 
The demand for oil, like other primary commodities, depends 
mainly on the state of the global economy. Despite improvements in 
energy efficiency as a result of the price increases of the 1970s and 
early 1980s, oil demand remains closely linked to the growth in 
economic activity. Over the past five years, world oil consumption 
has grown at an average annual rate of just under 2 per cent, 
adding about 1.3 million b/d to global demand each year. 
Oil demand is growing fastest in the newly industrialising 
countries of the Asia-Pacific rim where the economies have been 
expanding very rapidly indeed, but the pace of growth slowed 
dramatically in 1998 as a result of the financial crisis before 
bouncing back in 1999. From 1993 to 1997, the average annual rate 
of oil demand growth in Asia (excluding China) was just over 7 per 
cent. By contrast, oil demand in the industrialised countries of the 
OECD has grown more slowly, averaging only 1.5 per cent over the 
same period, as some countries emerged from recession. And oil 
demand in the former Soviet Union has continued to fall as the 
economy contracts and the old, energy-intensive industries are no 
1.2lpage 4 Supplement 7 Sep 2000

--- Page 37/964 ---
1 The trading of oil 
longer viable. However, the OECD countries still consume more 
than half the world's oil and it is in these countries that the oil 
markets are most developed and least constrained by government 
controls. 
Oil demand is also highly seasonal (see Fig. 1.2). Peak demand 
for heating fuels such as kerosine, gas oil and residual fuel oil 
obviously comes in the winter, while peak demand for transport 
fuels such as gasoline and diesel comes in the summer. In addition, 
other products such as bitumen, which is used for road building 
also display a clear seasonal pattern that can also affect oil price 
behaviour at certain times of the year. Although the steady shift 
towards a greater share of transport fuels in the global demand 
barrel has reduced the annual variation in world oil consumption, 
there is still a difference of 3 to 4 million b/d between the winter 
peak and the summer trough in demand. 
Prices play an ambivalent role in determining oil demand. In 
the short-term, they appear to have very little impact on the level 
of oil consumption, except in those markets such as electricity 
generation where there is direct competition with other fuels. In 
most markets, oil consumers cannot easily react to price increases 
because this requires investment, either in a new car or new boiler. 
As a result, the impact of higher prices may take years to filter 
through. But in the longer-term, there is no doubt that prices have 
a significant impact on the level of oil consumption. 
The effect of prices on demand is clearly demonstrated by 
comparing the impact of consumer government taxes on the 
amount of oil consumed per head of the population in countries 
with similar levels of economic development. For example, the US, 
which still imposes very low taxes on oil products, consumes nearly 
twice as much oil per capita as the UK and France, which impose 
much higher taxes. And the fact oil products are either not taxed, 
or even subsidised, in many developing countries helps to explain 
the very high rates of growth of oil demand achieved in recent 
years, although this is gradually changing. 
Matching oil supply to demand has become much more difficult 
since the oil industry ceased to be properly integrated. Most oil 
producers simply maximise their output, subject to the technical 
constraints of the field, in order to get a quick return on the very 
large amounts of money they have invested in developing the oil 
field in the first place. And because their operating costs are 
typically much lower than the sunk capital costs, they will continue 
to produce until oil prices reach very low levels. 
Supplement 7 Sep 2000 1.2lpage 5

--- Page 38/964 ---
I 
Oil Trading Manual 
35 
30 
25s -c 
120 E -OPX 
Former Soviet Union 
Zlllllll Other non-Opec 
Source: IEA 
Figure 1.3 Composition of world oil supply (in.c NGLs) 
In the North Sea, for example, most of the fields have 
operating costs of less than @/barrel and are unlikely to be shut in 
unless prices fall below this level. As a result, the responsibility for 
restraining production below capacity lies with the eleven 
remaining members of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (Opec), who are committed to maintaining prices above 
their marginal cost of production in order to extract what they 
regard as a fair economic rent for oil. So far, they have succeeded, 
although competition for market share between Opec members has 
frequently forced prices down until falling revenues have 
eventually restored a sense of discipline to the Organisation. Opec 
was particularly successful during the first half of the 1980s when 
Saudi Arabia was prepared to play the role of swing producer alone, 
but it became more difficult to balance the market after the Saudis 
refused to continue cutting production at the end of 1985. However, 
Opec re-discovered the benefits of collective action in 1999 when 
low prices persuaded Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and non-Opec 
Mexico to co-operate over output cuts in order to bring the market 
back into balance and reduce high stocks. 
Two factors have made Opec's self-appointed task more 
difficult. First, there is the continued expansion of oil production 
outside Opec (see Fig. 1.3). Although lower oil prices were initially 
expected to slow down the development of non-Opec oil fields, this 
has not proved to be the case. By encouraging technological 
developments and forcing companies to cut costs, lower oil prices 
1.2lpage 6 Supplement 7 Sep 2000

--- Page 39/964 ---
1 The trading of oil 
actually made it easier to develop new oil fields outside the Opec 
countries. As a result: the call on Opec crude continues to grow 
more slowly than Opec would like to see despite rising oil 
consumption. 
Secondly, there is the inherent seasonality of oil demand. As 
the residual supplier to the world oil market, Opec potentially faces 
large fluctuations in the level of production required by refiners at 
different times of the year. This not only makes it difficult to keep 
track of the underlying level of demand, but is also difficult to 
administer since Opec members find it very hard to agree on how to 
allocate production between themselves. The problem was 
temporarily "solved" in November 1993 by setting a fixed 
production quota over a much longer period of time, thus leaving 
the market to handle the seasonal variation in the demand for 
crude. 
But growing demand made the fixed quota seem increasingly 
irrelevant and Opec found it difficult to restrain production after 
investment by foreign companies in some Opec countries boosted 
output and Iraq was allowed to export limited volumes of oil for 
humanitarian purposes. As a result, global stocks reached record 
levels following the Asian economic crisis and crude prices fell close 
to $10/bbl. Faced with the prospect of even lower prices if 
production was not cut, Opec negotiated new output targets which 
have succeeded in eliminating the stock surplus, pushing prices 
back over $30/bbl. Now Opec faces a new challenge: how to raise 
output by enough to rebuild stocks and reduce prices without 
precipitating another price collapse. So far, attempts to create an 
automatic adjustment mechanism in response to price changes 
have failed to garner wider support within the Organisation. 
Stocks 
The level of stocks held by the world oil industry has fallen since 
the early 1980s and was probably close to a minimum accephble 
level in both 1996 and late 1999 and early 2000 (see Fig. 1.4). The 
reduction is partly due to the transfer of responsibility for strategic 
stocks fx.om the oil companies to their governments, partly due to 
changes in the structure of oil demand, and partly due to 
improvements in the efficiency of company operations. And with 
renewed demand growth in recent years, the forward cover* 
provided by OECD industry stocks has been sharply reduced. 
"’ Forward cover is calculated by dividing stocks at the end of a given 
period by consumption in the following period. The result is expressed in 
days. 
Supplement 7 Sep 2000 l.2fpage 7

--- Page 40/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
4000 
3500 
3000 
-2500 
a, ;z 
2000 - -P 
5 1500 1000 
500 
0 
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 
ource: IEA 
Figure 1.4 Total stocks held in OECD countries, end year 
From the end of 1994, the seasonally-adjusted level of OECD 
industiy stocks fell sharply as companies reduced their operating 
stocks after introducing "just-in-time'' stock management policies. 
But demand continued to grow and the forward cover provided by 
total OECD industry stocks fell to only 54 days at the end of 
December 1995 -just below the historical minimum operating 
stock level of 55 days. As a result, prices rose sharply in 1996 as 
cold weather boosted demand and supply lagged behind 
expectations due to problems with new non-Opec fields and delays 
to the Iraqi "oil-for-aid'' deal. 
However, oil prices fell in 1997 with the resumption of Iraqi 
exports, growing competition between Opec members for market 
share and the aftermath of the Asian economic crisis, and industry 
stocks rose again, reaching 58 days offorward cover in the first half 
of 1999. Since then industry stocks have fallen sharply after Opec 
reined in production, falling to a new low of only 53 days of forward 
cover at the end of the second quarter of 2000. 
A detailed study of the US oil industry published by Exxon", 
showed that the US held a total of 89 days of oil stocks at the start 
of 1981 measured in terms of forward consumption. Out of this 
total, 7 days' worth were held by the government in the Strategic 
Petroleum Reserve (SPR), and 82 days' worth was held by 
companies. According to Exxon 58 of the 82 days' worth of company 
s...c... Exxon, World Oil Inventories, Exxon Backgound Series, August 
1981 
1.2fpage 8 Supplement 7 Sep 2000

--- Page 41/964 ---
-- 
-- -- 
1 The trading ofoil 
.._._.Gasoline - Distillates - Residual Othei 
-600 
550 
-v) , .. .. 
. a .E 400 
m
< 350 
P 300 
E 
100 4 
Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan 
91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 
Source: IEA 
Figure 1.5 OECD industry product stocks, end month 
stocks were minimum operating stocks. More than a third of the 
minimum operating stocks (20 days' worth) occupied the pipelines 
and tankers that transport the oil, filled the refineries that process 
it, and provided the "tank bottoms" for the storage facilities. The 
remaining 38 days' worth of stocks represented the oil in transit 
through the system, of which a quarter (10 days' worth) was in the 
form of crude oil and three quarters (28 days' worth) was in the 
form of refined products. 
Companies need to hold more stocks in the form of products 
than crude for two reasons. First, the different types of refined 
product need to be kept separate from each other and move along 
their own distribution channels, which simply increases the 
amount of oil tied up in the supply chain once it has passed through 
the refinery. And, secondly, refineries are not sufficiently flexible to 
vary their product yields in line with the seasonal variation in 
demand. For. this reason, refiners are obliged to accumulate 
unwanted stocks of heating oil and residual fuel oil when they 
increase runs to meet peak gasoline demand during the summer, 
while the reverse occurs during the winter (see Fig. 1.5). It is this 
involuntary stock build by refiners that creates the characteristic 
seasonal pattern in the level of stocks held by the oil industry and 
influences the behaviour of prices in the forward and futures 
markets (see Chapter 7). 
Supplement 7 Sep 2000 1.2Ipage 9

--- Page 42/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
1.2.3 Not just another commodity 
It can be seen that oil has a number of important trading 
characteristics that also help to distinguish it from other 
commodities. First, there are many different types of crude oil and 
refined products and the relative value of each of these is 
constantly changing. As a result, the oil market suffers from 
considerable relative price volatility as well as absolute price 
volatility. Although other commodity markets also cover a range of 
grades or qualities, the scale of the price risks involved is typically 
much smaller. 
Secondly, oil products are manufactured jointly in a refinery 
and, although refiners have some flexibility to vary the yield of 
each product derived from a barrel of crude oil, they cannot always 
match supply to demand across the entire spectrum of products. As 
a result, the price of any one type of refined product cannot be 
determined independently of the rest of the market since changes 
in the supply or demand for other products must also be taken into 
account. While joint production is not unique to the oil market, the 
factors determining the price relationships between the different 
refinery products are potentially much more complicated. 
Thirdly, neither demand nor supply are particularly 
responsive to changes in price in the short-run. On the demand 
side, consumers cannot easily switch to some other source of energy 
if the price of oil rises since this usually requires investment in new 
equipment. In addition, there are some uses, such as 
transportation, for which oil still has no effective substitute. While, 
on the supply side, the operating costs of existing capacity are 
substantially lower than the capital costs of installing new capacity. 
As a result, oil prices can fall to quite low levels without shutting in 
production. In the longer run, it is a different story since both 
consumers and producers will eventually respond to price changes, 
but this happens on a much slower time scale. 
Finally, oil is a highly political commodity. It still provides 40 
per cent of the world's primary energy consumption and is essential 
to the functioning of any developed economy. However, two-thirds 
of the world's oil reserves and a third of the world's oil production is 
in the Middle East, which remains a potentially unstable area. 
With most of the world's largest consuming countries heavily 
dependent on imports for their source of supply, the threat of 
supply disruption remains very real and political events often play 
a significant role in the oil market. 
1.Wpage 10 Supplement 7 Sep 2000

--- Page 43/964 ---
0 
1.3 Structure of the oil market 
Successful markets need standardised trading instruments in order 
to generate liquidity and improve price transparency, and oil is no 
exception. But, since oil is an inherently non-standard commodity, 
the industry has chosen a small number of "reference" or "marker" 
grades of crude oil and refined products to provide the physical 
basis for a much larger "paper" market which trades derivative 
instruments such as forward and futures contracts. Although the 
choice is often arbitrary and problems can arise due to unforeseen 
changes in the underlying physical market, the industry has 
invariably found ways of adapting the contracts since the rest of 
the market now depends on their continued existence. 
The most important derivative trading instrument is the New 
York Mercantile Exchange's Light Sweet Crude contract. It is 
usually known as "WTI" since West Texas Intermediate crude st.ill 
effectively underpins the market despite the introduction of 
alternative delivery grades in recent years. Nymex WTI is the most 
actively traded oil market in the world and not only provides a key 
price marker for the industry as a whole, but also supports a wide 
range of other, more sophisticated, derivative instruments such as 
options and swaps. 
1.3.1 Spectrum of instruments 
The oil market now offers an almost bewildering array of "paper" 
trading instruments that can be used to reduce the price risks 
incurred by companies buying and selling physical oil. These 
include: 
futures contracts, which enable companies to buy and sell oil 
of an agreed standardised quality, quantity and delivery terms 
for future delivery within the institutional framework of a 
futures exchange. The purpose of the exchange is to provide a 
trading forum that matches buyers and sellers, acts as a 
counter-party to all purchases and sales so as to guarantee 
performance, publishes prices as deals are done, and organises 
and monitors the physical delivery of the oil if required. Most 
futures contracts do not result in physical delivery but are 
cancelled by taking an offsetting position on the futures market 
at a later date. 
1.3lpage 1

--- Page 44/964 ---
0 
Oil Trading Manual 
forward contracts, which enable companies to buy and sell oil 
privately between themselves for future delivery outside the 
institutional framework of a futures exchaiige. Although some 
forward paper contracts, like 15-day Brent, are highly 
standardised and actively traded in much the same way as a 
futures contract, forward contracts are more risky to use than 
futures as positions are more difficult to liquidate and the 
contract is not administered or guaranteed by a clearing 
organisation. Unlike futures, forward contracts normally 
require physical delivery unless the counter-parties agree 
otherwise, but the oil delivered can pass through many hands 
before it reaches someone who actually wants to lift a physical 
cargo. 
price swaps, which enable companies to exchange price risk 
without involving the physical delivery of any oil. Like forward 
contracts, swaps are agreed directly between two parties and 
are not guaranteed or otherwise organised within any 
institutional framework. Simple price swaps involve two back- 
to-back contracts, one at a fixed price and one at a floating price 
so as to avoid any obligation for physical delivery. Swaps do not 
need to be standardised in the same way as futures or forward 
paper contracts as any mutually acceptable price index can be 
used in the contract. Swaps are also usually based on auerage 
prices for a future delivery period and are less vulnerable to 
short term price fluctuations that can undermine the 
usefulness of a futures or forward contract. 
options, which enable companies to lock in a maximum or 
minimum price for the purchase or sale of oil at a future date in 
exchange for a fixed non-refundable "insurance" premium. 
Options can be traded either within the institutional framework 
of a futures market, in which case the option confers the right 
(but not the obligation) to buy futures contracts at an agreed 
fEed price at an agreed date in the future, or privately between 
companies on the "over-the-counter" or OTC market, in which 
case the option can be exercised into any mutually acceptable 
trading instrument, either futures, forward or swaps. 
Taken together, these derivative trading instruments have 
transformed the structure and operation of the oil market over the 
past fifteen years, giving companies much more control over prices 
and bringing new participants into the market, such as banks and 
financial trading houses, who are prepared to take on some of the 
risks created by oil price volatility. 
1.3/page 2

--- Page 45/964 ---
1 The trading of oil 
1.3.2 Trading horizons 
The most important change to the oil market has been the gradual 
extension of trading horizons further and further into the future. 
Before the introduction of forward and futures contracts, oil 
companies had no effective means of setting prices for future 
delivery. As a result, the spot market was forced to bear the brunt 
of trading decisions that might relate to time periods ranging 
anywhere from a day to a year ahead, which could only have added 
to price volatility. Given that refiners loading oil in the Arab Gulf 
are exposed to the risk of price changes over a period of 60 to 90 
days as the crude is transported, refined and delivered to the 
consumer, it is clearly important to have markets with longer 
trading horizons. 
The first step towards longer trading horizons was provided by 
the forward and futures markets, which initially provided contracts 
trading up to a year ahead. As the main users were the middle-men 
who handle the oil as it passes down the supply-chain, rather than 
the producers and consumers who constitute the two ends of the 
chain, the markets were most active over a relatively short time 
horizon of up to three months ahead. 
Over the past few years, however, the time horizon of the oil 
market has been extended much further forward (see Fig. 1.6). The 
most active futures contracts, such as Nymex Light Crude Oil, now 
trade for delivery up to seven years ahead and the industry has 
acquired a new set of trading instruments that enable participants 
I I I I I 
lmh 6mhs lyear 2years 5years loyears 
Figure 1.6 Oil market trading horizons 
Supplement 3 May 1997 1.3fpage3 I

--- Page 46/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
to establish prices even further into the future. Instead of being 
limited to a time horizon of only a few months, prices can now be 
reliably obtained for periods from one to ten years ahead. This has 
been made possible by the introduction of financial instruments 
such as price swaps and OTC options, which have created a liquid 
market that enables companies to trade the price of oil over a time 
frame that is appropriate for producers investing in new oil fields, 
01-for consumers building new power stations. 
1.3.3 Interlocking markets 
The market structure that has evolved is largely unplanned and 
highly complex since it now covers the entire spectrum of possible 
trading instruments (see Fig. 1.7). Formal futures markets operate 
alongside sophisticated forward paper markets. Over-the-counter 
(OTC) swap and option markets provide a tailor-made service that 
complements highly liquid and standardised futures and options 
contracts. And physical traders frequently use financial 
instruments to fix prices independently of delivery. As a result, it is 
impossible to say where the price of oil is actually determined, since 
every segment of the market plays a role. 
The high profile of the reference markets such as Nymex WTI 
or 15-day Brent has led some commentators to complain that the 
Figure I. 7 Structure of the oil market 
1.3/page 4

--- Page 47/964 ---
1 The trading of oil 
paper "tail" is now wagging the physical "dog", and that derivative 
trading instruments have an influence that is disproportionate to 
their significance. In addition, the fact that the majority of oil 
trading is concerned with price differentials between grades, 
locations, markets, and delivery periods, suggests that absolute 
price levels are no longer important to the oil industry. But these 
criticisms are unjustified, since they miss the real point about the 
current structure of the oil market. 
Although the structure appears to be potentially unstable 
because it funnels a large volume of activity through a small 
number of standardised trading instruments, this is necessary in 
order to improve liquidity in what would otherwise be a highly 
unstandardised and illiquid market. But the scale of trading in the 
derivative markets does not necessarily mean that the transactions 
have no underlying physical motivation. In order to come to terms 
with the difficult trading characteristics of oil, companies need to 
use a combination of techniques and instruments to protect 
themselves from both absolute and relative price risk, and it is the 
strong relationships between these interlocking markets created by 
hedging and arbitrage that ensure a stable structure for the oil 
market. 
1.3lpage 5

--- Page 48/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 49/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and 
refining 
Hugh Quick 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 Uses of oil products 
2.3 Pricing 
2.4 Properties of oil products 
2.4.1 Product specifications 
2.4.2 General properties 
2.4.3 Gasolines and naphthas 
2.4.4 Kerosines 
2.4.5 Gasoils 
2.4.6 Fuel oils 
2.4.7 Special products 
2.5 Crude oils 
2.5.1 Hydrocarbon chemistry 
2.5.2 Crude oil types 
2.5.3 Crude oil quality 
2.5.4 Condensates and NGLs 
2.6 Oil refining 
2.6.1 Oil refineries 
2.6.2 Refining processes 
2.6.3 Distillation and separat,ion 
2.6.4 Treating processes 
2.6.5 Conversion processes 
2.6.6 Blending 
2.6.7 Flexibility 
2.6.8 Economics 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 50/964 ---
2.7 Environmental factors 
2.7.1 Reformulated gasolines 
2.7.2 Diesel engine particulate emissions 
2.8 Measurement, sampling and testing 
2.8.1 Measurement 
2.8.2 Sampling and testing 
Appendix 
2.1 Product properties 
2.2 Crude oil distillation yields 
2.3 Crude oil assay 
2.4 Simple refinery flow diagram 
2.5 Complex refinery flow diagram 
2.6 Further reading 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 51/964 ---
2.1 Introduction 
The purpose of this section is to outline the physical characteristics 
of crude oils and products which are important for users and 
traders. It will also describe oil refining briefly so as to provide 
some understanding of its capabilities and limitations in changing 
the properties of oil products. 
The section is included for those who trade crude oil and 
products, or use them: but who do not have first hand technical 
knowledge of the industry. It is beyond the scope of this manual to 
give more than a brief introduction to the topics raised and on some 
of them the trader will need more comprehensive knowledge. A list 
of suggestions for further reading is given in Appendix 2.6 which 
may complement the knowledge gained by experience. 
2.lIpage 1

--- Page 52/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 53/964 ---
2.2 Uses of oil products 
Paul Frankel" pointed out that the most important characteristic of 
oil is that it is liquid. Its liquid state determines the way oil is 
produced, transported, refined, distributed and used. It is tempting 
to abbreviate that list of activities by saying 'handled' but that is 
just the point, it cannot be handled in the literal sense. 
Because of its chemical nature and liquid state oil is a very 
compact source of energy and, given the right equipment, can be 
transported and controlled easily. That is why oil products are so 
widely used as asource of energy. 
Everyone is familiar with the main groups of oil products 
which, in descending order of volatility, are: 
0 Liquefied petroleum gases (LPGs), 
0 Gasolineshaphthas, which include motor gasoline or 'petrol', 
0 Kerosines, including most aviation fuel, 
0 Gasoils/diesels, used mainly for home heating and for small 
and medium sized diesel engines, 
0 Fuel oils, used in furnaces, boilers and in large diesel 
engines. 
Liquefied petroleum gases are propane, butane or mixtures of 
the two, familiar to most as 'Calor Gas' or 'Camping Gaz' but also 
used industrially. Bitumen 01-asphalt should perhaps be added to 
the bottom of the list but, while significant volumes are used, it is a 
non-energy product and the trade usually follows a rather special 
route. There are other non-energy uses for oil products. The largest 
volume non-energy use is petrochemical feedstock but others, such 
as lubricating oils, solvents and waxes, are probably more widely 
known. 
The characteristics of these oil products are described below 
but, before coming to these, it is worth considering in more general 
terms how the above product groupings arose. As has been said the 
underlying value of oil products comes from their physical and 
chemical nature but individual products have evolved through the 
combination of developments in many different fields. 
The first use of petroleum was for lighting. Oil lamps had 
previously used vegetable or animal oils. Crude oil was no use for 
lamps as it was too volatile, causing risks of explosion in use, was 
thick, black and messy and burnt with a very smoky flame. Since 
millions of oil lamps existed the onus was on the oil industry to 
"Essentials of Petroleum, Paul Frankel, Chapman & Hall, London 
(1946); 2nd Edition, Frank Cass & Co. Ltd, London (1969). 
2.2lpage 1

--- Page 54/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
produce a usable product. This was done by distilling the crude oil 
into fractions of different and controlled volatility. By this means 
kerosine was produced which was clean, had enough volatility to 
burn in lamps but not so much as to be unacceptably dangerous, 
and was less smoky than previous oils. Moreover, kerosine could be 
produced at a cost that was competitive with the animal and 
vegetable alternatives. 
Distillation of crude oil is still the basic process of oil refining. 
It separates oil into fractions according to their volatility and 
molecular size ranges and this is the reason why the main product 
groups are differentiated by volatility. Many other properties of oil 
fractions; such as specific gravity (densityi and viscosity, are 
largely determined by molecular size: fuel oils, for instance, will 
always have a higher specific gravity and viscosity than kerosine. 
Kerosine suitable for lamps constituted only a small proportion 
of the crude oil, typically 15 per cent, so something had to be done 
with the rest. The heavier, less volatile fractions, which were 
reasonably safe to store and transport could be burnt in boilers and 
furnaces once suitable designs had been developed. Here the onus 
was largely on the boiler and furnace makers to adapt to a new 
economic fuel which could compete very effectively with coal. 
Initially there was little use for the more volatile, gasoline 
fractions, and most were wasted. However, the internal combustion 
engine was being developed, initially quite independently of the 
availability of oil fractions, but it was soon realised that gasoline 
and gasoils were very suitable fuels. As a result, this quickly 
became the principal use of oil in the USA, the home of the oil 
industry, and the development of engines, petroleum fuels and 
lubricants has gone hand in hand ever since. 
The purpose of recounting this well known history is to 
illustrate the diversity of influences on the development of oil 
products, not least the need for safety and, nowadays, concern for 
the environment. The development of oil products is of course still 
continuing and, as was hinted at in the history, remains a 
compromise between the ideal product and one that can be 
produced economically. For instance, iso-octane would be an 
excellent motor fuel, failing the ideal perhaps only because its 
exhaust gas contains carbon dioxide, but it cannot be produced in 
the volume required at an acceptable cost, although it is interesting 
to note how widely ideas on an acceptable cost can vary in time and 
place. 
Mention of the volume of product required leads to another 
general point. Because oil is a very large volume business, over 
three billion tonnes per year world-wide, major changes require 
time. The introduction of unleaded gasoline is a good example. 
2.2fpage 2

--- Page 55/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
100% 
90% 
80% 
70% 60% 50% 
Middle distillates 
40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0Yo -I 
1987 1997 
ource: BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 1998 
Figure 2.1 Changing shape of the world’: demand barrel 
Although it would now be the first choice of most motorists, it 
cannot be used by older cars without modifications that many 
owners will not make and it takes something like seven years to 
turn over the stock of cars in use. Refineries also need new plant to 
produce unleaded gasoline in volume and large refinery process 
units have a building time of three to four years or longer from 
initiation to full production. 
Lastly, the possibility to use other fuels instead of oil products 
is worth noting. Fuel oil used in furnaces and boilers for power 
generation is easily substituted by coal on a short term basis and 
nuclear, hydro- and other power generation methods on a more 
permanent basis. This has indeed happened which, as will be seen, 
is why much effort has been devoted in the refining industry to 
turning fuel oil components into lighter products (see Fig. 2.1). 
Likewise gas oil for home heating can and is being substituted by 
natural gas wherever this latter is available. However, transport 
fuels such as motor gasoline, aviation fuels, diesel fuel and fuel for 
ships, or 'bunkers' as they are still called, have virtually no 
substitute nor any prospect of one on a significant scale in the near 
future. 
0E:CI) and emerging market, economies only, 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 2.2ipage 3

--- Page 56/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 57/964 ---
2.3 Pricing 
The pricing of crude oil and main product groups needs some 
general comment. When not controlled by governments, oil prices 
respond, like other commodities, in the longer term to supply and 
demand and in the shorter term to perceptions of supply and 
demand. A look at the behaviour of oil prices during the several 
Gulf crises since 1973 and the price of fuel oil during the UK 
miners' strike illustrates the point (see Fig. 2.2). In 1973 and 
1979/80 prices rose rapidly in response to a restriction of supply. In 
1986 they fell rapidly as a result of Saudi Arabia's increase in 
production. In all these cases the price response to the supply 
changes was exaggerated by perceptions or expectations, and some 
reversal was required. On the smaller scale of day to day price 
changes, the importance of expectations is clear and constant and 
quite sharp fluctuations are evidence of exaggerated response. 
The response of prices to the start of the Gulf War was much 
more muted, probably because fears were calmed by previous 
experience. Also, during the UK miners' strike the price of fuel oil 
relative to other products rose substantially, but not wildly, as a 
result of the restraint of coal production. The strike was seen as 
having a limited impact and accordingly the price movement was 
moderate. 
There is now a genuinely free (but not perfectj market in oil 
Arabian Light Dubai 
1960-1986 1987-1998 P,
I ’+ 
source: BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 1998 & Petroleum Argus 
Figure 2.2 Crude oilprice history, annual average 1960-1498 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 2.3fpage 1

--- Page 58/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
and pricing is the mechanism by which physical supply and 
demand are brought into balance. However, it would be a mistake 
to think that the wilder fluctuations of price that occurred on 
previous occasions could not happen again, particularly when 
expectations lose touch with reality. 
The general comment above applies to both crude oil and 
products. However, the relationship between crude and product 
prices also needs comment. The main products of refining crude oil 
are necessarily co-produced. The analogy almost invariably used is 
that of a butcher carving a carcass into different cuts. Therefore, 
although product prices may, and do, fluctuate widely relative to 
each other, they must together be related to crude oil price because 
refineries will not continue to operate long on negative margins and 
competition will set a ceiling to high margins. It may seem an 
academic point but it is perhaps worth noting that crude oil prices 
reflect product prices, not the other way round, as supply and 
demand factors act, in the fwst instance, on products. 
Although the product prices do fluctuate relative to each other 
there is nevertheless a pattern (see Fig. 2.3j. Generally speaking 
the lighter products are priced higher than heavier products. Fuel 
oils and LPG face competition from coal, natural gas and other 
energy sources and this certainly limits their prices. LPG therefore 
does not usually enjoy the premium associated with being the 
lightest product. Transport fuels have no real substitutes, at least 
within current price ranges. Their relative prices reflect their own 
supply and demand factors but there is also an underlying 
450 400 
I1 I ____ Gasoline 
�I .~. II Naphtha 
350 - Gasoil - HSFO300 
E 250 c 
0 
s 200 
150 100 
50 
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 
I 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 2.3 Relative product prices, cargoes cif NW Europe 
2.3fpage 2 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 59/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
structure based on technical and cost considerations. 
For example, motor gasolines usually cost more to produce 
than diesel fuels and are generally priced higher. Jet fuel has a 
higher price than diesel: partly because, as a lighter product it has 
greater value' and partly because the special care required in its 
storage and transport is more costly. Two warnings are necessary 
here. First, prices may be distorted by taxes; taxes on motor 
gasoline more than double prices at the pump in Europe. Secondly, 
bulk prices are often quoted in dollars per ton but actually sold at 
cents per gallon or per litre. For example, on 12 November 1991 
premium gasoline was quoted at $238 per tonne and gasoil at $217 
per tonne in Rotterdam. On a volume basis these prices would be 
roughly 17.4 cents per litre and 18.4 cents per litre respectively. 
Most petroleum measurements are still made in volume -
usually tank contents or meter readings. Consequently, sales 
contracts will usually include an adjustment for specific gravity so 
that pricing is effectively volume based. There are some exceptions 
such as road or rail tanker vehicle loads of bitumen and fuel oils 
which can be measured directly by weight. Also new meters that 
measure mass directly are coming into use but are only common for 
LPG at present. Apart from these examples, most final sales to the 
end consumer are measured in volume; retail sales of gasoline and 
diesel at the pump, for example, are always sold on a volume basis. 
This means that the trader, who is further back down the supply 
line, must also be concerned with volume (rather than weight) since 
profits will ultimately depend on the volume of product sold. 
Since oil expands and contracts with temperature, volumes are 
adjusted to a standard temperature, usually 1PC or 60gF -
although it should be noted that these temperatures are not exactly 
the same: 60QF is equivalent to 15.6". 
Example 
Suppose a trader has agreed to buy 20,000 metric tons of gasoil at 
$200/tonne. The contract will define the quality specifications of the 
product including its specific gravity (see Section 2.4.2 below). 
Suppose the agreed specific gravity at 15% was 0.845, but when 
the cargo was loaded the inspector's report indicated that the 
'"tJet fuel, or kerosine, provides an explanation of why lighter 
products usually have higher value. As mill be seen later, part of the 
kerosine fraction can be made inh gasoline whereas diesel cannot. Also 
kerosine, having a lower viscosity than diesel is a better fuel oil cutter 
stock. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.3fpage 3

--- Page 60/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
specific gravity was 0.847. Although a specific gravity of 0.847 is 
within acceptable limits for the quality of the cargo, there is still a 
price adjustment to take account of the reduced volume. 
A cargo of 20:000 tonnes of gasoil with a specific gravity of 
0.845 is equivalent to 23,669 cubic metres at 15%, i.e. a price of 
$169/m3. But 20,000 tonnes of gasoil with a specific gravity of 0.847 
is equivalent to only 23,613 cubic metres at WC, i.e. a price of 
$199.53/m3. Although it looks like a small difference, it is worth 
more than $9000 on the deal. 
The thermal expansion of petroleum fuels is not large. If the gasoil 
cargo in the example above had been loaded at an ambient 
temperature of 20°C it would have occupied approximately 23,707 
cubic metres compared with 23,613 cubic metres at 15C. However, 
volumes are always corrected back to the standard temperature of 
15°C for the purposes of any price adjustment. 
The relative prices of specific products within a group are 
generally cost related though still subject to variations of supply 
and demand. For instance, super premium unleaded gasoline is 
priced higher than unleaded premium or Eurograde because it 
costs more to produce; the lower the sulphur and cold properties of 
diesel the higher its price; and in fuel oils lower viscosity and lower 
sulphur fuels are higher priced than heavier and higher sulphur 
fuels. These quality premium relationships, though variable in 
extent, are directionally stable. 
2.3lpage 4 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 61/964 ---
2.4 Properties of oil products 
2.4.1 Product specifications 
Within the main product groups described briefly in the last section 
are hundreds of individual products, each tailored for a specific use 
or climate or environmental regulation or price or a combination of 
these factors. The quality of each individual product is defined by a 
'product specification'. A product specification is a list of properties 
which the product must possess to be acceptable to the customer or 
regulatory authority under which he works. For the most part 
these properties are defined as a maximum result, or a minimum 
result, or a range of results from certain specific tests to which the 
product must be subjected. However, more general requirements 
may be included, for example, 'clear and bright' or 'water white', or 
'acceptable odour'. The test methods and their accuracy are very 
closely defined, usually by independent bodies, such as the Institute 
of Petroleum (IP) or the American Society for Testing Methods 
(ASTM). A buyer or a seller may use his own method, but it will be 
of little value unless it is accepted by the other party. 
Many test methods have been developed to simulate conditions 
under which a product is used and require special and sometimes 
complex equipment; the tests for octane number of gasolines are 
examples. Some typical product specifications are shown in 
Appendix 2.1. 
Product specifications are part of the agreement between 
buyer and seller and, in principle, may be freely negotiated 
between them, as they often are between traders. However, the 
trader should be aware that his oil will ultimately be used in a 
product for which the specification is not normally negotiable, 
either because part or all of it may be a legal requirement of the 
area in which the product is used, transported or stored, or because 
the final user is unwilling to change it. Where large numbers of 
customers are involved, such as in retail sales, changing 
specifications can be a very difficult and lengthy process. 
2.4.2 General properties 
In this manual it is not possible to describe in detail the product 
properties nor the tests used to measure them as normally defined 
by specifications, only the most impoi-tant items can be mentioned. 
The important properties and tests for most products are: 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.4lpage 1

--- Page 62/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Specific gravity (SG) 
The specific gravity of a product is its density at 60°F divided 
by the density of water at the same temperature. It is often 
written as 'SG 60/60"F'. Oil products range from less than 0.50 
for LPGs to over 1.00 for bitumen. It can be an extremely 
important property because it reflects the volume to weight 
ratio of the product, i.e. the number of barrels, gallons or cubic 
metres per tonne. Very large volumes of oil products are sold 
on a volume basis, e.g. all retail automotive fuels except 
perhaps LPG, yet these products or their components are often 
previously traded on a weight basis (see Section 2.3). 
Beware that the density of oil at 15°C is sometimes 
divided by the density of water at 4°C and the result can also 
be called specific gravity (or sometimes density, though this 
latter is incorrect). This specific gravity is often written as 'SG 
15/4"C'. The difference between SGs 60/60"F and 15/4"C is 
small but can be significant when converting from volume to 
weight or vice versa. 
Specific gravity can also be important for other reasons, 
for instance in marine bunkers. Ships often separate traces of 
water from the fuel by centrifuge which depends on the 
difference in density between water and oil. An SG greater 
than 0.9910 is not usually acceptable because the centrifugal 
separation of oil and water is poor. 
Colour 
The colour of oil products varies from completely colourless 
and clear for gasolines and kerosines to straw coloured for 
gasoils and black opaque for most fuel oils. (Dyes are 
sometimes added to gasolines and kerosines.) There are several 
variations of the test for colour but most compare the sample 
with a set of standards that are numbered. The significance of 
colour is mainly as warning of contamination. A very small 
quantity of residual (fuel oil type) component will darken a 
light product significantly, hence the need to use separate 
transport and storage with cheaper freights applying to 'black 
oils' than to 'white oils'. A black oil ship or tank can usually be 
cleaned for white oil use, but it is a rather laborious process. 
Appearance is another much used specification, the 
requirement is often given as 'clear and bright'. Interpretation 
is somewhat subjective but a dark or hazy oil will not pass. 
2.4lpage 2 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 63/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
0 Flashpoint 
Flash point measures the ease with which a product can be 
ignited by applying a flame to its surface. The test involves 
heating a sample of the product and applying a flame to it. The 
lowest temperature at which the liquid ignites is its flash 
point. There are several varieties of this test. Flash point is, of 
course, closely related to volatility and is intended as an 
indication of how safe it is to store and use a product. 
Gasolines have flash points below ambient temperature but 
minimum values are specified for kerosines, gasoils and fuel 
oils. 
There are often legal requirements for flash points and 
codes regulating tank storage construction lay down different 
requirements for high flash and low flash product tanks. 
Volatility 
Most specifications include tests to define the volatility of the 
product. The most universal is ASTM distillation. Nearly all oil 
products are a mixture of a large number of different 
hydrocarbons (refer also to Section 2.5.1) and therefore boil 
over a range of temperatures, not at a single temperature like 
water. The ASTM distillation test is a simple laboratory 
distillation of a measured sample and the temperature at 
which set percentages of the sample are recovered after 
condensation are recorded. The temperature of the first 
recovery is called the initial boiling point (IBP) and the 
temperature of the last is the final boiling point (FBP). 
(Specifications may be in terms of 'per cent evaporated. Per 
cent evaporated is calculated from per cent recovered by 
adding the loss.) In addition to loss there is often some 
undistilled residue left in the flask and a maximum is 
sometimes specified. 
The vapour pressure of the lighter more volatile products 
such as gasolines is usually specified because it gives a more 
sensitive measure of the tendency to cause pumping 
difficulties, excessive vapour discharge in shipping and storing 
and carburettor vapour lock etc. The most widely used test is 
Reid vapour pressure (RVP). 
0 Water content 
The solubility of water in oil is very small and though there 
are tests to measure the amount of water dissolved in oil they 
are only of importance in refining processes and some special 
products such as transformer oils. However, small droplets of 
water can be suspended in oil and this situation is controlled 
2.4/page 3

--- Page 64/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
by specifying either appearance (for the clear oils such as 
gasoline or kerosine) or water content or both. Suspended 
water can normally be separated from oil simply by settling 
and draining in a tank but traders should be aware that in 
some cases this can be a difficult and long drawn out process. 
Sulphur content 
Many oil products contain small amounts of sulphur. (Refer 
also to Sections 2.5.1 and 2.6.2.1 Sulphur can be harmful for 
several reasons: it can cause an obnoxious smell, it can be 
corrosive and, when the oil is burnt, it produces sulphur oxides 
which, with moisture, are most definitely corrosive. The most 
common specification is simply a maximum sulphur content 
and there are several test methods depending on the sulphur 
level expected and the type of oil. However, the Doctor test, 
copper strip and silver strip tests are also related to sulphur 
content. 
2.4.3 Gasolines and naphthas 
These are the lightest oil products that can be stored at ambient 
temperatures and pressures. (LPGs have to be stored either at 
increased pressure, e.g. the familiar calor gas bottle, or 
refrigerated.) Their IBP is usually between 40°C and 100°C and 
their FBP less than 200°C. They have two main uses which require 
different properties. 
Firstly, they are used to make motor gasoline. (Motor gasoline 
is almost invariably a blend of several components.) For this 
purpose they have tight specifications on volatility, appearance and 
sulphur content but they also have other specifications, of which 
octane number is the most important. Octane number measures the 
tendency of the gasoline to 'knock' in engines; the higher the octane 
number the lower the knocking tendency. There are two octane 
number tests for motor gasolines: the F1 01’ 'Resewch Method' and 
the F2 or 'Motor Method. The F1 test gives a higher result than the 
F2 and the difference between them is referred to as the 
'sensitivity' of the gasoline. It is common to find both methods 
specified for motor gasolines, for instance the premium unleaded 
grade, or Eurograde, has a minimum F1 specification of 95 and a 
minimum F2 of 85. The octane number of the more volatile part of 
gasoline, the 'front end octane number, may also be specified. In 
the United States (Fl+F2)/2 is often used for octane number 
specifications. 
The lead compounds tetra-ethyl and tetra-methyl lead (TEL 
and TML) are very effective octane improvers but they are 
2.4fpage 4 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 65/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
poisonous to most forms of life and lead in the exhaust gases of 
motor vehicles poisons the catalysts used in ‘converters’ to reduce 
atmospheric pollution. For most countries in Europe the maximum 
lead in leaded grades is 0.15 gm Pbfitre; for unleaded Eurograde 
gasoline the maximum is 0.013 gm Pb/litre. Lead is not the only 
octane improver used in gasoline, oxygenated compounds such as 
methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) are also used; maximum and 
minimum levels may be specified. It should be noted that 
oxygenated compounds improve octane number as blending 
components rather than as additives and much larger proportions 
are used, e.g. up to 10 or 15 per cent (see Section 2.6.6). 
Benzene is a component of most gasolines with excellent 
octane number but it is more toxic than other components and a 
maximum percentage, usually between three and five per cent, is 
often specified, but this has been reduced to one per cent volume in 
some areas in the United States. 
Secondly, gasolines or naphthas are used as feedstocks for oil 
refineries and petrochemical complexes. For this purpose the 
important property, in addition to the general properties described, 
is the chemical composition. The relative proportions of four types 
of hydrocarbons are measured: these are, paraffins, olefins, 
naphthenes and aromatics. The test is, therefore, known as the 
PONA. Petrochemical users look for a high paraffin content, oil 
refiners look for high naphthene and aromatic contents. The other 
important property for either application is total absence of lead 
contamination, so that gasoline for these purposes cannot be 
shipped or stored in vessels that have previously been used for 
leaded gasoline. 
2.4.4 Kerosines 
The next group of products in decreasing order of volatility are 
kerosines with ASTM boiling ranges between 150°C and 250°C. 
They have to meet a flash point specification usually set at 38°C 01� 
100°F. Their. principle use in Europe now is as aviation turbine fuel 
(ATF), commonly called Jet Al. There are several different grades 
of these fuels but all have a large number of tightly specified 
properties and it is only possible to mention some of the most 
important ones. 
Jet A1 is subjected to very low temperatures in the tanks of 
aircraft at high altitude, therefore the fuel must remain entirely 
liquid without the formation of any solid crystals, which could plug 
filters, down to a temperature of about -50°C. This property is the 
freezing point. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.4/page 5

--- Page 66/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Jet A1 is then subjected to high temperatures in the engines 
before it is burnt and is therefore tested for thermal stability. It is 
also important that the fuel burns well with little smoke so a smoke 
point may be specified possibly combined with a naphthalene or 
aromatics content. 
Apart from tight specifications the procedures for sampling, 
testing and delivering Jet A1 are carefully controlled to ensure that 
no contamination can occur. 
Kerosine is still used as a lighting and cooking fuel, in many 
parts of Asia on a large scale. For this use smoke point is the most 
important specific test. The test is done in a specially designed 
lamp and the height of flame achieved without smoking is 
measured. A common smoke point specification is 25 mm minimum, 
although lower specifications are used in the Indian subcontinent 
and Indonesia. This is a higher specification than is usually 
required for aviation fuel but lighting kerosine does not have to 
meet the very low freezing point and thermal stability tests of Jet 
Al. Dual purpose kerosine (DPK) -which meets the specifications 
of both products -is sometimes required or supplied, usually to 
save on dup1icat.e storage and delivery systems. 
2.4.5 Gasoils 
Gasoil is the generic term used for products with a minimum flash 
point of 66’C (150°F) and, usually, a maximum FBP between 320°C 
and 370°C. Theii- original use was for making gas , hence the name, 
but they are now chiefly used as diesel engine fuels or for home 
heating. There is also a secondary but significant use as 
petrochemical feedstock. 
For both the main uses stability in cold weather is important. 
At low temperatures the heavier components of a gasoil tend to 
crystallise and cause filters to plug. Unusually severe spells of 
winter weather sometimes result in stranded vehicles because their 
fuel has frozen. There are several tests, all of which are designed to 
detect the formation of crystals. Pour point actually checks the 
temperature at which the oil ceases to flow freely. Cloud point 
detects the first formation of crystals but cold filter plugging point 
(CFPP) is now more commonly used. Flow improving additives are 
sometimes used to inhibit crystal formation. Though usually not in 
the specifications it may be wise for traders to know whether such 
additives have been used. 
The fuel also has to burn well without sooty deposits. For this 
purpose a maximum 90 per cent or 95 per cent recovery 
temperature or an FBP in the ASTM distillation test may be 
2.4Jpage 6 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 67/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
specified to limit the heavy components. CFPP maximum may also 
have a similar effect. 
As a diesel fuel, gasoils have to ignite at the right moment in 
the engine. This property is measured by cetane number a 
minimum of 50 being a common specification. Cetane number is 
measured in a test engine, as is octane number, and is an 
inconvenient test. Cetane index is therefore commonly used as a 
substitute because it can be calculated fiom more easily measured 
properties. Additives are available which improve cetane number 
but they do not affect cetane index. 
The sulphur content of diesel fuels is becoming increasingly 
important and: in Europe, maxima have descended rapidly from 0.5 
per cent to 0.3 per cent to 0.15 per cent and 0.05 per cent will 
become general by 1996. The purpose of these reductions is to lower 
sulphur dioxide and particulate emissions from the exhaust gases 
for environmental reasons (see Section 2.7j. 
2.4.6 Fuel oils 
Fuel oils usually contain a large proportion of residual components, 
i.e. components which are left unvaporised in the distillation of 
crude oil. They therefore contain all the largest and heaviest 
molecules, are usually black and often nearly solid at ambient 
temperature. 
Easy pumping and clean burning are essential for fuel oils. To 
achieve this the viscosity of the oil must be right. A maximum (and 
sometimes a minimum) viscosity is always specified and grades of 
fuel oil are normally distinguished by their maximum viscosities, 
e.g. 180 centistokes at 50°C or 280 centistokes. The actual viscosity 
of an oil is highly dependent on its temperature; the more viscous 
fuel can therefore still be used but it has to be stored and used at a 
higher temperature and is therefore usually cheaper. 
Clean burning depends largely on the atomisation of the oil in 
the burning device, be it a boiler burner or a diesel injector. That is 
why viscosity is so important. But burning quality can also be 
impaired by very heavy components called asphaltenes. Tests 
related to the presence of these components are also used. The 
commonest are Conradsen carbon residues and Ramsbottom 
residues and maximum values are specified. 
As described in Section 2.5.1, crude oils do contain very small 
quantities of non-volatile inorganic compounds, usually metal 
compounds. These are concentrated in the residues and therefore in 
fuel oils. When fuel oil is burnt these inorganic compounds remain 
as ash and even the best atomisation will not prevent ash 
formation. Consequently, there is usually a maximum ash content 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.4/page 7

--- Page 68/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
specified, typically 0.20 per cent weight. Some metals, particularly 
vanadium, attack the refractory material of furnaces and there may 
be a metals specification. 
Sulphur content is also important for environmental reasons; 
3.5 per cent weight is a normal high sulphur fuel maximum, but it 
is often lower for uses on land. In Europe, low sulphur fuel is often 
1per cent sulphur maximum, though in Japan and the USA it may 
be 0.3 per cent maximum. Sulphur content of residue is normally 
determined by the origin of the crude oil and it is costly to reduce it 
by refining processes. 
Low sulphur residues are often waxy and have high pour 
points which, in these cases, may determine the storage and 
pumping temperature rather than viscosity. For heavy high 
sulphur fuels, pour point may also be specified but is usually less 
important because the flow properties are chiefly determined by 
viscosity. 
2.4.7 Special products 
In the scope of this manual it is only possible to touch on the main 
points of product properties and traders should be aware that not 
all quality matters are routine and special situations do arise. For 
example, metals and ash content of fuel oils are not normally a 
problem but with some fuels of Venezuelan origin they can be. 
Also, there is a host of special products of which LPG and 
bitumen are probably the largest volume. LPG tests and 
specifications are relatively simple and largely aimed at ensuring 
that the pressure limits of the equipment used for them is not 
exceeded. 
The largest volumes of bitumen sold are paving grades for road 
making and the specifications are usually fairly straightforward. 
However, traders may like to know that there are also some very 
specialised bitumen applications both for roads and other industrial 
uses and that there is a growing use of complex bitumen 
technology. 
2.4Ipage 8 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 69/964 ---
2.5 Crude oils 
2.5.1 Hydrocarbon chemistry 
Crude oils and therefore oil products are made up almost entirely of 
hydrocarbons which, as the name implies, are compounds of the 
elements carbon and hydrogen. These two elements combine in an 
enormous number of different ways and any one crude oil will 
contain billions of different hydrocarbon compounds. Most 
hydrocarbons are chemically quite stable and their common 
reaction is to burn in air or oxygen to give carbon dioxide, and 
water. When combustion is incomplete, as for example in internal 
combustion engines, some carbon monoxide is also formed. 
Hydrocarbons release a great deal of heat when they burn and 
therein lies their value. 
Although crude oils consist almost entirely of hydrocarbons 
they usually contain small proportions of compounds containing 
sulphur, oxygen, nitrogen and metals. Some of these non-
hydrocarbon compounds can be harmful, being corrosive or toxic, 
and have to be dealt with in refining processes. 
2.5.2 Crude oil types 
Crude oils were formed by action of geological processes on the 
remains of ancient marine life. Recoverable quantities are found 
trapped by particular rock formations in many different parts of the 
world. As an almost infinite number of different mixtures of 
different hydrocarbons are possible, no two crude oils are exactly 
alike. Crude oils from the same area are frequently similar but 
there are also exceptions. 
Several hundred different crude oils are produced but many of 
them only in small quantities and there are about seventy crude 
oils which are widely known and regularly traded. The quality of 
each crude oil is tested and the results usually provided to 
customers and refiners. These quality assessments are called crude 
assays. 
The most important characteristics of crude oils are described 
below and there is a summary for some of the better known traded 
crudes in Appendix 2.2. 
2.5/page 1

--- Page 70/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Product yield 
Different crude oils contain different proportions of the millions of 
different hydrocarbon compounds that can be found. One of the 
most important characteristics of a crude oil is the size distribution 
of the different hydrocarbon molecules. The smaller, lighter, more 
volatile hydrocarbons can be separated by simple distillation, which 
is the basic process in oil refining. Those crudes with a relatively 
large proportion of smaller, lighter hydrocarbons are referred to as 
'light' crude oils and those with less as 'heavy' crude oils. The light 
crude oils tend to be more valuable than the heavy because they 
produce larger proportions of gasolines, kerosines and gasoils, 
collectively known as distillates, than heavy crude oils by simple 
refining processes (see also Section 2.6.7). 
No single test can give a really reliable assessment of the 
product yield possible when a crude oil is refined but specific 
gravity gives some guidance; the lower the SG the more distillates 
will usually be produced. Unfortunately custom has it that the 
measure used is API gravity in degrees rather than SG. The 
relationship between the two is: 
AF'I gravity " at 60°F = (141.5 / SG @ 60/60"F) -131.5 
API gravity is therefore inversely proportional to specific gravity 
and light crudes have API gravity of about 37' or above and heavy 
crudes 30" API or below. The following table shows API gravity and 
total atmospheric distillate yields for some crude oils: 
Crude type APl Atmospheric distillate 
(d.egrees) (per cent volume) 
Ekofisk 44.4 72 
Brass River 40.9 74 
Ercnt 37.1 61 
Arabian Light 54.0 55 
Taching 32.2 34 
Arabian Heavy 28.3 48 
Champion 24.6 68 
Bachequero 13.2 27 
The above crudes have been deliberately chosen to show how 
unreliable API gravity can be as a guide to yields. The yields of 
crude oils of similar type (see above) show a closer correlation to 
API degrees. In the above list only the two Arabian crudes are 
really of the same type. The crude assay will normally give a simple 
2.5Ipage 2 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 71/964 ---
2 Phvsical characteristics and refining 
product yield breakdown and this is a much more reliable guide to 
the actual yields obtainable (.see Appendix 2.3). 
The yield of a crude oil is based on simple separation by 
distillation into fractions (see Section 2.6.33 and the result is 
expressed either in per cent volume or per cent weight of the crude 
oil recovered. European refiners mostly use weight while those in 
the Americas or the Far East use volume. 
For example, Brent Blend crude oil would give the following 
approximate yields from primary distillation: 
Boiling range Product type Product yield 
(degrees C) (% weight) (% volume) 
C4 (or less) LPG and gas 1.8 2.8 
rrC5 -85 Gasolinesinaphthas 6.1 I.0 
~85 165 Gasolinesinaphthas 14.2 15.7 
165-235 Kerosine 12.2 12.8 
235 -300 Gasoil 12.8 12.8 
300 -350 Gasoil 9.8 9.6 
> 350 Residues 43.1 39.2 
The product yields are given in both per cent weight and per 
cent volume. In the middle (gasoil) fractions, it can be seen that 
there is little difference between the weight and volume yields. But 
the heavy residue fraction obviously has a higher percentage 
weight yield than percentage volume yield, and vice versa for the 
light fractions. 
It should be noted that the "cut point" temperatures are not 
standard and are chosen by whoever is making the assay. C5 
(pentanes) are usually taken to represent the lowest point at which 
hydrocarbons distilled from crude oil can be recovered at 
atmospheric pressure, but this may also be represented as a 
temperature, the IBP or initial boiling point. American crude oil 
assays will often quote temperatures in degrees Farenheit. 
Hydrncarhoa type 
In Section 2.4.3, four types of hydrocarbon were mentioned. Olefins 
do not occur in natural crude oils, being produced in refining 
processes, but paraffins, naphthenes and aromatics have somewhat 
different properties and the proportions of each in a particular 
crude oil can be important. There is no clear cut measure such as a 
PONA analysis which can be used for crude oils and the proportion 
of each type can vary greatly between the light fractions and the 
heavy. The following is a brief summary of the main points of 
interest: 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.5ipage 3

--- Page 72/964 ---
0 
Oil Trading Manual 
Gasolinehaphtha fractions 
Paraffins have low octane numbers and make poor refinery 
feedstock but crack more easily and make excellent 
petrochemical feedstock. Naphthenes and aromatics have the 
reverse properties. 
Kerosines 
Paraffins have good smoke points but tend to have high 
freezing points. Napthenes are intermediate and aromatics 
have the reverse properties. 
Gasoils 
Paraffins have excellent cetane numbers but the larger and 
heavier paraffin molecules have high freezing points and 
tend to form waxy crystals which give higher CFPP results. 
Again naphthenes are intermediate and aromatics have the 
reverse properties. 
Fuel oils 
The heavy paraffins can have very high freezing points and 
highly paraffinic or waxy residues can have pour points as 
high as 35 or 40°C. They also have few asphaltene type 
molecules and are less viscous than naphthenic/aromatic 
residues. They cannot be used for bitumen manufacture. 
"on-paraffinic' or asphaltic residues have higher viscosities, 
lower pour points and make good bitumen. In these heavy 
fractions the distinction between hydrocarbon types becomes 
blurred because the molecules are so large and complex that 
they can have features of each type within the same 
molecule. 
Sulphur content 
The sulphur content of crude oils varies between about 0.1 per cent 
and 3.0 per cent weight. It is not only the total sulphur content that 
is important but also the form in which it occurs. Sulphur 
compounds usually occur in all fractions of crude oil but, generally, 
the heavier the fraction the higher the sulphur content. Some crude 
oils contain considerable quantities of hydrogen sulphide (H,S) 
which is a gas under ambient conditions and extremely toxic. 
Special measures have therefore to be taken in their production 
and refining. Sulphur compounds can be removed from distillate 
fractions relatively easily (refer to Section 2.6.4) but it is much 
more difficult and expensive to remove them from residues. 
2.5Ipage 4 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 73/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
Therefore, the production of a low sulphur fuel oil normally 
requires the refiner to start with a low sulphur crude. Most low 
sulphur crudes are paraffinic or waxy with high pour point 
residues. Most low pour point residues come from high sulphur 
crude. 
Oxygen and metals 
A few crude oils contain oxygen compounds in the form of 
naphthenic acids which can be highly corrosive. This is usually 
measured by a total acid number. Similarly, a few crude oils have 
high metals contents, particularly vanadium in the range of 
250-400 parts per million (ppm) whereas 50 ppm or less would be 
normal. These metal compounds stay in the residues, never in 
atmospheric distillates but they can cause problems for refining 
and the fuel oil produced from them. Some Venezuelan crudes 
suffer from both these disadvantages. 
2.5.3 Crude oil quality 
A named crude oil may well be a blend of crude oils from a number 
of fields which are close together and for which it is economic to 
share common facilities such as pipelines, tankage, shipping 
terminals, etc. Many North Sea crudes are such blends, for example 
Brent and Flotta. The characteristics of the oil from the different 
constituent fields will be different and, as production rates are not 
constant, variations in the quality of the named but blended crude 
will vary. These can be short term variations caused by the need for 
field or pipeline maintenance work or long term gradual variations 
due to the build up and decline of production of component fields. 
Producers naturally try to limit these variations in quality but they 
can be quite significant to refiners. A major change may be 
accompanied by a revised crude assay but frequently there is no 
such revision. Refiners who are familiar with a particular crude 
will be aware of quality changes they have experienced and can 
advise on their severity. 
There are a number of producing wells in every field and the 
oil from different wells may not be exactly the same quality. Also 
the quality of oil may gradually change as production proceeds in a 
field. Therefore, quality may also vary fiom a single field though 
these changes are not usually great. 
A crude assay is an estimate of the quality of a crude oil but 
not a specification such as is used for products. Traders may need 
to be watchful on crude quality as significant changes can take 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.5/page 5

--- Page 74/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
place without breaching the generally rather imprecise descriptions 
in crude contracts. 
2.5.4 Condensates and NGLs 
The fluids produced from a well may be totally liquid under 
ambient conditions or totally gas but, usually, they are a mixture of 
the two. Gas and oil are separated in the field to produce a liquid 
which can be stored and shipped in at atmospheric temperatures 
and pressures. It is a matter of degree as to whether the gas 
associated with oil production is called 'associated gas' or oil 
produced with gas is called 'condensate'. Condensates are usually 
very light crude oils and frequently contain little or no gasoil and 
fuel oil fractions. 
Natural gas liquids (NGLs) have a different origin. Oil field 
separation of oil and gas is imperfect so the gas produced, mainly 
methane and some ethane, contains appreciable amounts of 
propane, butane and heavier hydrocarbons. Even natural gas 
which produces no condensates at well head conditions may contain 
appreciable quantities of propane and heavier hydrocarbons. 
Therefore, these gases may be processed in a plant using 
refrigeration and absorption techniques to obtain a better 
separation of the hydrocarbons. The propane and heavier 
hydrocarbons are then themselves separated into propane and 
butane (LPG), which have to be stored and shipped at elevated 
pressure or reduced temperature, and a heavier fraction which is 
liquid under ambient conditions and which can be shipped 
conventionally. It is this liquid fraction which is called natural gas 
liquid (NGL). NGLs are very light liquids normally containing only 
gasolinehaphtha fractions with some kerosine. NGL production 
has increased rapidly in recent years and may be sold as such or 
remixed with crude oil, giving rise to another possible crude oil 
quality variation. 
2.5Ipage 6 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 75/964 ---
2.6 Oil refining 
2.6.1 Oil refineries 
Crude oils cannot be used directly except a5 a boiler fuel for reasons 
which it is hoped are now clear. (Crude oils are used as fuel in 
Japan but such use would be uneconomic under normal tax and 
environmental conditions.) Crude oil, therefore, has to be refined to 
make the products required by users. There are over a hundred oil 
refineries in Europe and many hundreds world-wide. All are, of 
course, unique in their location but very few are identical in 
processing or other facilities either, each having been designed for a 
particular set of circumstances. Refining processes will be described 
in Section 2.6.2 but some general points about oil refineries are 
worth noting. 
Oil refineries are very expensive and rather permanent 
facilities as they cannot be moved. A modern refinery of normal 
size, starting from scratch or 'greenfield' would cost at least US $2 
billion. 'Would is the appropriate word here because it is extremely 
difficult to get permission to build a new refinery on a greenfield 
site in Europe, USA and Japan for environmental reasons, 
although new refineries are being built in Asia. Because refineries 
are expensive and permanent' they tend to change slowly, usually 
lagging considerably behind state of the art technology in one 
aspect or another. 
Refineries are often thought of in terms of their processing 
plant only. However, only about half of the investment is in 
processing plant; the rest is in tankage, blending facilities, ship 
berths and loading equipment, road and rail car loading, utilities 
(steam, electricity, etc.), workshops, stores, fire fighting equipment, 
offices, etc. The first four of these items are of interest to traders 
who should, in particular, know something about the blending 
characteristics of oil products. 
Refining is a large scale business. Most refineries are in the 
range of 50,000 to 150,000 b/d or 2.5 to 7.5 million tonnes per year 
crude oil intake capacity. However, some have a capacity of 300,000 
b/d or more. 20,000 b/d is approximately equivalent to 1 million 
tonneslyear. 
In the 1980s a number of refineries were closed completely because 
there was world-wide over capacity; it is not expected that many more will 
close as capacity is now in better balance with demand. 
2.6/page 1

--- Page 76/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The capacity of a refinery is often quoted in round figures, as 
has been done above. The figure usually given is 'name plate' 
capacity. This usually refers to the design or achieved capacity per 
calendar day (e.g. bpcd) or per year of the atmospheric distillation 
units on a design crude. The effective capacity of a refinery varies 
with the crude being processed, usually the lighter the crude the 
lower the capacity. Capacities may also be given per stream day 
(e.g. bpsd), which means per day of normal operation. Stream day 
capacities are higher than calendar day or annual capacities 
because allowance has to be made for planned maintenance shut 
downs, often called 'turnarounds' and for breakdowns. Most 
refineries plan on averaging 330 to 350 stream days per year, 
except for visbreakers, thermal crackers and cokers which have to 
have more frequent decoking shutdowns. Average stream days per 
year were quoted because major shutdowns or turnarounds are 
usually carried out. at two or three year intervals. 
2.6.2 Refining processes 
To convert crude oil into products the refinery has to sort the crude 
hydrocarbons into volatility or size ranges, which is done by 
distillation. It also has to remove undesirable non-hydrocarbon 
compounds, which requires treating processes. Although refineries 
can and do operate with simple distillation and treating alone, this 
may not be enough as it is usually necessary to change the size or 
shape of the hydrocarbons present in crude oil. There are therefore 
three basic types of refinery processes: 
0 Physical separation, which sorts hydrocarbons by size or 
shape, 
0 Treating, which removes undesirable contaminants, 
0 Conversion, which changes the shape or size of 
hydro carbons. 
Conversion is necessary for two reasons. First, the octane 
number of the naturally occurring gasoline fractions is not high 
enough for modern motor cars and most refineries need to make 
motor gasoline. A conversion process is required to make different, 
higher octane hydrocarbons from the ones which occur naturally. 
Second, there is usually a greater demand for the distillate 
products than can be produced fiom natural crude oils. Some of the 
non-distillate residue, or fuel oil components have to be cracked 
2.6Ipage 2

--- Page 77/964 ---
2 Phvsical characteristics and refining 
into smaller more volatile hydrocarbons to satisfy the demand for 
distillate fuels. 
Since all refinery processes are dealing with liquids and gases 
they look much alike, except perhaps for catalytic crackers. They 
consist of pumps, tubular heat exchangers, furnaces, columns, 
reactors, air coolers and vessels all connected by pipes. 
2.6.3 Distillation and separation 
Fractional distillation is the foundation of all refining. Not only is it 
used for the first (or primary) separation of crude oil into fractions 
but it is also used in many other conversion and treating processes 
to separate the products of reactors or to separate hydrocarbons 
from a solvent. 
It is a continuous process with, for example, crude oil being 
pumped in and the fractions being continuously withdrawn (see 
Fig. 2.4). The principle is simple. The crude oil (or other mixture) is 
heated, typically to about 350"C, and pumped into a tower or 
column. By constantly removing heat at the top and constantly 
adding heat at the bottom, a temperature gradient is established in 
the column; which is cooler at the top and hotter at the bottom. 
Each hydrocarbon has its own boiling point and accumulates in a 
particular part of the column. If it is in too hot a part of the column 
it will vaporise and rise up, if in too cold a part of it will liquefy and 
drop down. Offtake pipes at various points of the column can 
therefore draw off fractions of specific boiling ranges. 
No separation is perfect but it can be improved, in the design 
of the unit, by increasing the length of the column, and in the 
operation by increasing the heat withdrawal and addition. The 
capacity of the unit is set by the heating and pumping capacity and 
by the diameter of the column. If the unit is overloaded, separation 
efficiency falls very rapidly. On the other hand, most units can 
operate reasonably efficiently down to 50 per cent of their capacity. 
The usual fractions withdrawn fi-om a crude distillation unit 
are: 
Fraction Typical boiling range 
(degrees C) 
A small quantity of gas 
LPGs Less than 40 
Light naphtha or tops 40 to 80 
Heavy naphtha 80 to 165 
Kcrosinc 165 to 235 
Light gasoil 235 to 300 
Heavy gasoil 300 to 360 
Residue Above 360 
2.6/page 3

--- Page 78/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
HE Main furnace 
AD[ 
Hot reboil 
QFeed Bottom4product 
Pump (Crude oii) (Residue) 
@I994 M Lw 
Figure 2.4 Fractiorral distillation 
More than one column is used to obtain these fractions and 
some treating processes may be an integral part of the unit. The 
boiling range and yield of the fractions can be altered by altering 
the temperature gradient of the column. 
Primary distillation of crude is carried out at a pressure only 
slightly above atmospheric. It is often called 'atmospheric 
distillation'. A temperature of about 370°C is the maximum that 
can be used because at higher temperatures the heavier 
hydrocarbons in crude oil start to break up or crack leaving 
deposits of coke which would clog the unit. The heavier the crude 
(the lower the API gravity) the more is left undistilled and emerges 
from the unit as 'atmospheric' or 'long' residue. 
2.6lpage 4

--- Page 79/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
Vacuum distillation 
More distillate can be obtained from the atmospheric residue by 
distilling at reduced pressure or vacuum. Typical flash zone 
pressures are 30 to 40 mm of mercury (Hg), atmospheric pressure 
being 760 mm Hg, and temperature about 390 to 400°C. Often 
more than half the atmospheric residue can be distilled off as 
'vacuum gasoil' or 'waxy distillate' leaving the rest as 'vacuum' or 
'short residue'. The separation is poor but, importantly, the 
asphaltenes and metals are left in the short residue. The short 
residue usually has a very high viscosity and would be quite solid 
like asphalt at ambient temperatures. To make it into a saleable 
fuel oil it has to be thinned or 'cut-back with distillate fractions. 
Other separation processes 
There are several other commonly used physical separation 
processes, for instance solvent extraction processes such as furfural 
and sulfolane extraction of aromatics and molecular sieves used for 
the separation of light hydrocarbon isomers. However, none of 
these processes is used to anything like the extent of distillation. 
2.6.4 Treating processes 
Treating processes are aimed at removing, or neutralising the small 
quantities of harmful non-hydrocarbons which are found in all 
fractions from the distillation of crude oil. Sulphur compounds are 
the commonest and often the processes which deal with them also 
deal with other contaminants such as naphthenic acids (oxygen 
compounds). Low sulphur crudes often have negligible quantities of 
sulphur compounds in their distillate fractions and no treating is 
required. However very few refineries can rely safely on one 
hundred per cent low sulphur or sweet crudes for their feedstock 
and therefore nearly all of them include treating processes, for 
example Merox treating or hydrotreating. 
Merox treating 
The Merox process does not remove sulphur but converts reactive, 
corrosive and smelly mercaptans into inactive and largely harmless 
di-sulphides. It does this by oxidation with air in an aqueous 
caustic solution with a catalyst. It is a cheap process but the 
product must be dried properly after treatment, often by using salt 
and then a clay tower. There are some solid disposal problems. The 
2.6lpage 5

--- Page 80/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
process is mostly used for kerosine. There is a similar process, the 
Solutizer process, that does not use a catalyst, which is used for 
sweetening catalytically cracked gasoline but it is seldom used for 
straight run gasolines t.hese days. 
Hydrotreating 
The most important process is hydrotreating or hydro-
desulphurisation. There are many varieties of this process but the 
essentials are the same (see Fig. 2.5). The oil product is mixed with 
hydrogen gas and passed over a catalyst, usually 
cobaltholybdenum, in fixed bed reactors, at high temperature and 
pressure. The sulphur compounds are converted into hydrogen 
sulphide which can easily be separated from the hydrocarbon 
fraction as it is a gas under normal conditions. The severity of the 
treatment required, that is the temperature, pressure and 
residence time on the catalyst, depends on the boiling range of the 
fraction and the degree of desulphurisation required. These 
processes ordinarily achieve about 90 per cent sulphur removal but 
can be made to effect almost complete removal. 
The process can be applied to any oil fraction though only 
distillates are normally treated. Residue desulphurisation is 
possible but seldom applied. Hydrotreating is more expensive than 
Merox and needs a supply of hydrogen. The hydrogen sulphide gas 
produced also has to be dealt with, usually by concentration in an 
amine treater and then partial oxidation to elemental sulphur 
which can be transported and sold. 
Figure 2.5 Hydro trea tiizg (hydrod esulp hLC risationj 
2.6lpage 6

--- Page 81/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
2.6.5 Conversion processes 
Catalytic reforming 
Straight run gasoline fractions have low octane numbers. Tops are 
often about 65 to 70 F1 and heavy naphtha 45 to 55 although some 
crudes with naphthenic and aromatic gasoline fractions are 
appreciably better. However, to make a gasoline of 95 F1 something 
better is obviously essential. The octane number of heavy naphtha 
can be increased to the range 95 to 100 F1 by catalytic reforming or 
platforming. In this process the naphtha is mixed with hydrogen 
and passed over a catalyst containing platinum and usually 
rhenium as well, at high temperature (see Fig. 2.6). The older units 
use catalyst in fixed beds and high pressure but modern units use a 
mobile catalyst and much lower pressure. The reactions which take 
place are complex but the result is much higher octane, some 
cracking to LPG and, importantly, a net production of hydrogen. 
Some coke is formed in the reaction which deactivates the 
catalyst. In the old units high hydrogen pressure was used to 
inhibit the formation of coke and the unit was periodically taken 
out of operation to regenerate the catalyst by burning off the coke. 
In modern units, called CCR units, the catalyst is continuously 
regenerated so that pressure can be lowered, resulting in better 
reforrnate and hydrogen yields and also less down time. 
The catalyst is very easily poisoned by sulphur. The sulphur 
content of the reformer or platformer feed must therefore be low, 
usually less than 1ppm nowadays. To achieve this, hydrotreating is 
essential. Consequently there is a neat synergy between 
Hydrogen recycle gas 
Butane 
lighter7Stabilizer 
column 
Naph -LReformate 
fee 
This is a very simplified flow scheme of a SEMI REGENERATIVE REFORMER 
Almost all reformers built now are CONTINUOUSLY REGENERATIVE (CCR). 
CCR units have 3 or 4 reactors stacked one on top of the olher and catalyst 
which flows through them, not fixed beds as shown above. 
01994 M Lee 
Figure 2.6 Catalytic reforming (platforming) 
2.6lpage 7

--- Page 82/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
platforming and hydrotreating. Hydrotreating is essential before 
platforming and platforming produces the hydrogen needed for 
hydrotreating. As platforming normally produces more hydrogen 
than is needed for treating its own feed, the other gasoline fractions 
are usually hydrotreat.ed and some gasoil fractions as well. 
The processing line-up of the simple fuels refinery consists of 
crude distillation, hydrotreating and platforming. It is often called 
a hydroskimming refinery and there are still many examples of 
such refineries. A simplified flow scheme is shown in Appendix 2.4. 
Thermal cmcking 
Although catalytic reforming is a conversion process in that it 
produces real chemical changes in the hydrocarbons, the term 
'conversion' is commonly applied only to residue conversion 
processes. Thermal cracking is a residue conversion process, aimed 
at increasing the yield of distillates from a crude oil. It takes the 
residue of either atmospheric or vacuum distillation and converts 
some of it to lighter distillate fractions. 
It is a very simple process and works by heating the residues 
to temperatures in excess of 400°C so that some of the large 
molecules break up or crack into smaller ones (see Fig. 2.7). As was 
mentioned before, this process results in some coke deposition and 
thermal crackers are designed with this in mind. The coke has to be 
burned away periodically, usually three or four times a year. 
The process is cheap but it gives only a rather small degree of 
conversion, up to 25 per cent, and the quality of the distillates 
3
 7 
FractionationA Gas and gasoline 
P
1 Gasoil 
VapourcolJt 
Lo 
I residue 
Note: Visbreaking is a single stage 
(one furnace) process only 
normally applied lo ’short’ 
or vacuum residue. @ 1994 M Lee 
Figure 2.7 Thermal cracking (two-stage cracking) 
2.6lpage 8

--- Page 83/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
produced is poor. There are many forms of thermal cracking but the 
simplest and probably the most used is a single stage unit operating 
on short or vacuum residue. Much of the distillate made is left in 
the residue or reblended with it and the result is really to reduce 
the viscosity of the residue. so these units are frequently called 
visbreakers. They can be valuable because they free good quality 
straight run distillates which would otherwise have to be used to 
thin or 'cut back' heavy residues to meet fuel oil viscosity 
specifications. 
The limit to the severity of thermal cracking is usually the 
stability of the residue produced. Over-cracked residues can deposit 
solid matter especially if blended or mixed with a paraffinic fuel or 
diluent. A well run refinery will not over-crack but it is as well to 
be aware that it can happen. 
A number of refineries have a hydroskimming processing line- 
up with the addition of a thermal cracker working on the long 
residue from the crude distiller. Such refineries are referred to as 
semi-complex refineries. 
Catalytic cracking 
Catalytic cracking is the most commonly used residue conversion 
process in Europe (see Fig. 2.8). The feedstock is mixed with hot 
finely divided catalyst, a zeolite or alumina, and the result is much 
more sensitive than in thermal cracking. The catalyst is so finely 
divided that, when mixed with air or vapour it behaves like a fluid, 
hence the name fluidized catalytic cracking unit or FCCU. Again 
coke is formed and deposited on the catalyst but coke rich catalyst 
is continuously withdrawn from the reactor and mixed with air in 
the regenerator where the coke is burned off providing the heat 
required for the process. The hot catalyst then returns to be mixed 
with the incoming feedstock and transferred to the reactor. 
The catalyst is easily poisoned by metals in the feedstock and 
also asphaltenes produce a very high proportion of coke. Therefore, 
the feedstock is usually not whole atmospheric residue but the 
vacuum gasoil or waxy distillate produced by vacuum distillation. 
Some modern units are designed to take residues, especially the 
low sulphur low asphaltene, North Sea type residues. 
FCCUs are essentially gasoline producers, converting up to 75 
per cent or so of feedstock into motor gasoline fractions. By the 
nature of the process these gasoline fractions are olefinic and have 
good octane number, about 90 or 91 F1 without the addition of lead. 
However, because the feedstock often has up to 2 per cent sulphur 
content, much hydrogen sulphide and other sulphur compounds 
appear in the products and have to be removed. Hydrotreating 
2.6lpage 9

--- Page 84/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Product 
REACTOR Fractionation and gas 
gas separation separation and treating 
Cyclone separation of treating. need extensive facilities. 
catalyst from product 
(top of reactor) and 
from flue gases (top of Carbon monoxide regenerator) are critical (and other gases) to performance, 
? to waste heat boiler especially the latter as there 
can be 
released into the 
atmosphere via Finely divided catalyst is ’fluidised’ 
either by vapourised feed or air the waste heat 
@19% M Lee 
Figure 2.8 Catalytic cracking 
removes the olefinic character and lowers the octane number 
sharply, so other treating methods have to be found. 
FCCUs also make considerable quantities of gas, some of which 
can be converted to excellent quality gasoline by the alkylation 
process. Gasoil fractions are produced but these have high density 
and low cetane number. 
The units are complex and expensive to build and are therefore 
usually designed for capacities of 5,000 to 10,000 tons per day. They 
are physically large and visually obtrusive and special measures 
have to be taken to separate the fine catalyst from flue gases 
discharged into the atmosphere. Also cat-cracked gasoline does not 
really have high enough octane number, especially F2, to meet the 
modern unleaded and low- lead grades. Nevertheless they are still 
the work horse of the effort to convert residues into distillate 
products which has been such a feature of recent refining 
development due to the increase in the price of oil and the 
consequent substitution of fuel oil by other. forms of energy. A 
simplified flow scheme of a 'complex' refinery including catalytic 
cracking is shown in Appendix 2.5. 
Hydrocracking 
The last conversion process to be mentioned here is hydrocracking. 
This process is different in kind from thermal cracking and 
catalytic cracking because it adds hydrogen in the cracking process 
rather than removing carbon as coke. The feed is passed through 
fixed catalyst beds in a hydrogen atmosphere at high pressure and 
2.6Ipage 10

--- Page 85/964 ---
2 Phvsical characteristics and refining 
temperature. Little coke is formed and the process is much more 
akin to hydrotreating, in fact it can be difficult to draw a line 
between severe hydrotreating which includes some cracking and 
mild hydrocracking. Because catalysts are used, as for FCCUs, the 
feedstock is usually vacuum distillate rather than the whole 
residue. 
There are many types of hydrocracker but a common one is a 
two reactor series flow unit (see Fig. 2.9). The first reactor 
desulphurizes and denitrifies the feed and the second, using a 
different catalyst, produces the cracking. These units operate at 
very high pressure and achieve nearly 100 per cent conversion to 
distillates with FBP below 370°C. They are flexible and can vary 
their output between naphtha, kerosine and gasoil very widely. The 
quality of the products made is excellent, having virtually no 
sulphur and good burning properties. The heavy naphtha produced 
does not have good octane number and must be catalytically 
reformed. It is, however, an excellent reformer feed. Hydrocrackers 
can also use the poor quality gas oil fractions produced by thermal 
and catalytic crackers as feed. 
The units are usually designed for capacities of 2,000 to 6,000 
tons per day and are environmentally quite friendly. Their trouble 
is that they are expensive especially if hydrogen has to be 
generated from expensive oil (rather than cheap natural gas) to 
feed them; as they use 2 to 4 per cent weight hydrogen on feed this 
is often the case. However, because of the high quality products 
made, they are becoming more widely used in Europe (they are 
already widely used in the USA) and the combination of a CCR 
platformer, which produces 3 to 4 per cent hydrogen on feed, with a 
exothermic, so cooling between catalyst beds is required. 
3. Usually more than one reactor due to the high pressure and hence thick walls &weight. 
Figure 2.9 Hydrocracking 
2.6fpage 11

--- Page 86/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
hydrocracker can reduce the cost by eliminating the need for a 
separate hydrogen manufacturing unit. 
2.6.6 Blending 
Few finished products are run straight from process units to 
tankage, except kerosine for Jet Al. Most other products are 
blended from a number of components produced by the refinery 
processes. The main purpose of blending is to make finished 
products in the most economic way. Single refinery streams can 
seldom be made to meet all the economically important 
specifications of a product simultaneously. A blend of two or more 
can be made to meet specifications closely without costly overshoots 
or 'quality give-away'. Blending can also add flexibility by allowing 
a large number of different finished grades to be made from 
relatively few components, thus saving time and tankage. 
Two examples will illustrate the point. First, motor gasolines 
will often be blended from five components: 
IAPG Good octane hut, very high KVP 
Tops Low oct,ane and high volatility, but cheap 
lsomerate Moderate octane, high volatility 
Reformate High octane but low volatility 
Cat cracked gasoline Moderate octane and volatility 
The refinery will probably make three or four grades of finished 
motor gasoline from these; unleaded Eurograde, leaded premium, 
unleaded regular and perhaps unleaded super. Blending is used 
here primarily to meet the economically important specifications as 
closely as possible. 
Secondly, fuel oils may be blended from: 
High sulphur residue High Viscosity, high sulphur 
Low sulphur residue Moderate viscosity, low sulphur 
Cutter stock Low viscosity, moderate or low sulphur 
Six or seven different grades of fuel can be made at different 
viscosities and sulphur contents. Here a number of different grades 
of fuel can be made to order at the right viscosity and sulphur from 
few components. Often several different cutter stocks are used but 
these are also components of gasoils and diesels and stored for 
these products anyway. 
Blending is frequently done 'in-line' straight into ships by 
automatic ratio and quality control. For road and rail loading small 
intermediate tanks are used. 
2.6lpage 12 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 87/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
Good blending requires accurate information on the quality of 
the components and a detailed knowledge of blending correlations. 
However, a trader may find it worth knowing which properties 
blend in a roughly proportional way, i.e., the mixture has roughly 
the average of the component properties, and which do not. This 
knowledge may help him in assessing the likely value or cost of 
departure from specifications. The following properties blend 
approximately proportionately : 
0 Density (except LPG), note that. SG blends inversely. 
0 Sulphur content. 
0 Octane number. 
0 Aromatics content., PONA, etc.. 
The following properties do not blend proportionately: 
0 Colour. Too dark a colour can be difficult to lighten by 
blending, re-dist.illat.ion may be required. 
0 Flash point. A small deviation in flash point is usually 
correctable by blending; a large deviation may require re-
processing. 
Pour point, cloud point and CFPP. The blending behaviour of 
these is difficult to predict. Correction may be possible by the 
use of additives if these have not already been used. 
0 Viscosity. Blending is quite accurately predictable by the use 
of blending factors. 
Volatility. Correlations fois ASTM boiling points, RW, etc., do 
exist but they are not very easy to use or reliably accurate. 
Making a test blend is better when possible. 
0 Smoke point. Not often blended. 
Oxyge nutes 
The term "oxygenates" is used to describe some compounds of 
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen that are increasingly used for 
blending motor gasoline. These compounds are usually ethers, such 
as: 
0 Methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.6fpage 13

--- Page 88/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
0 Ethyl tertiary butyl ether (ETBE) 
0 Tertiary amyl methyl ether (TAME) 
or alcohols, such as: 
0 Ethyl alcohol, or ethanol 
0 Methyl alcohol, or methanol 
Iso-propyl alcohol 
All these compounds have very high octane numbers. The ethers 
(or ketones) have low water solubility, low vapour pressures and 
are made by special petrochemical processes, either in a refinery or 
a chemical plant. The lower alcohols are water soluble and have 
rather high vapour pressure (iso-propyl alcohol and higher alcohols 
much less so) than the ketones used. Methanol is made chemically, 
but ethanol is usually made by fermentation of carbohydrates from 
b’ iomass. 
Outside the United States, the main purpose of using the 
ketone oxygenates is to improve the octane number of gasolines and 
they become popular because environmental controls required the 
lead content of gasolines to be reduced or removed (see Section 
2.4.3). However, the effect of oxygenates on octane number is 
through blending rather than through chemical inhibition and so 
much larger quantities are required, typically 5 to 15 per cent by 
volume compared with 0.15 to 0.5 gms/litre for lead compounds. In 
the United States, oxygenates are also used for environmental 
reasons, mainly to improve air quality by reducing carbon 
monoxide emissions (see Section 2.7). 
Alcohols are also used to improve octane number, but the 
water solubility of methyl and ethyl alcohols and, to a lesser extent, 
their volati1it.y causes problems. It is common for oil products, 
including gasolines, to come into contact with water in storage and 
distribution systems. Hydrocwbon products (and ketones) are 
virtually immiscible with water so keeping them separate is usually 
easy. But, if a gasoline containing appreciable proportions of 
methanol or ethanol is in contact with water, phase separation can 
occur and special measures are needed to transport and store these 
gasolines to make sure that they do not come into contact with 
water. 
Sometimes ethanol is used as a motor vehicle fuel on its own, 
for example in Brazil. Its attraction is that it can be made from 
renewable biomass -providing an outlet for farmers -and the 
2.6lpage 14 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 89/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
engine modifications required to use it are not extensive. However, 
it is not economic to produce compared to vehicle fuels derived from 
petroleum and substantial subsidies are required to make it 
competitive. Methanol may also be used directly as a vehicle fuel 
and its attraction is that it can be made from natural gas. It may 
also be worth noting that many vegetable oils make good diesel 
fuels, although they are difficult to keep stable in storage. Like 
ethanol they are not economic to produce at present. 
2.6.7 Flexibility 
In present day conditions with a wide range of crude oils, products 
and intermediate streams available on free markets and where 
prices fluctuate rapidly, refiners can often gain a competitive edge 
from greater flexibility. This flexibility manifests itself in the ability 
to change crude types at short notice, to take intermediate 
feedstocks when they are available, for example vacuum gasoil, to 
meet changing proportions of products (often called 'cut of the 
barrel') and to make new or modified products when the price is 
right and ship them quickly by the means the customer wants. 
In the refinery, flexibility comes from a combination of three 
elements: 
Flexibility of the processing units, 
Flexibility of the off-plot facilities, such as tankage, blending 
facilities, road and rail loading, barge and shipping facilities, 
The flexibility of mind and organisation to use the facilities 
to their best advantage. 
Processing @exib tlity 
Crude distillinp; 
Foremost among the valuable process flexibilities is the ability to 
process crude oils of different yields and types. For example, 
although there is a good supply of low sulphur North Sea crudes in 
north-west Europe, a refiner would usually be very unwise to omit 
the treating facilities necessary to process higher sulphur Middle 
East crudes because there will be times when his margin is better 
on Middle East crude. 
The above is a very simple example and in practice the best 
margins are usually obtained by refining several different crude 
oils so as to use the better properties of each to offset their 
individual defects. For instance, most refineries could not make one 
per cent sulphur fuel oil from Middle East crude but they would not 
need 100 per cent expensive North Sea crude to do so and a 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.6/page 15

--- Page 90/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
combination of the two types of crude would be the most economic 
way of making such a fuel oil. 
The distinction drawn between processing and off-plot 
flexibility is not entirely realistic. Refiners cannot take advantage 
of a combination of crude oils nor make rapid changes in crude diet 
without adequate receiving and storage facilities. To get the best 
quality advantage from different crude oils it is often necessary to 
keep them segregated from each other, which can only be done if 
enough tankage is available. 
The optimum programming of a refinery is a complex matter 
but an idea, in very simple form, of the flexibility obtainable from 
different crude oils is given in the following table of product yields 
from a hydroslrimming refinery: 
Products North Sea Arab Light Arab Heavy 
(Q weight yields) 
LPG 1.5 1.5 1.5 
Motor gasoline 20.1 19.4 14.9 
Jet A1 6.0 6.0 6.0 
Diesel fuel 31.7 26.2 11.9 
Fuel oil 1% S 37.2 
Fuel oil 3.5% S 43.3 62.3 
Fuel and loss 3.5 3.6 3.4 
Secondary processing 
An example has been given as to how treating can provide 
flexibility by allowing a refinery to process both high and low 
sulphur crude oils, but conversion units such as cat. cracking and 
particularly hydrocracking also add flexibility to the processing 
output. The change of yields by changing crude oil has been 
illustrated above, but yields on the same crude oil can be changed 
by changing refinery operating conditions, pmticularly cut points 
between the fractions. 
Products Hydroskimming Complex 
(% weight yields) 
Max Max Max Max 
gasoline diesel gasoline diesel 
LPG 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 
Motor gasoline 21.0 17.8 38.0 30.2 
Kerosine 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 
Diesel 24.2 28.2 29.1 38.5 
Fuel oil 43.6 43.0 19.1 17.7 
Fuel and loss 3.7 3.5 6.3 6.1 
2.6/page 16 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 91/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
The flexibility to produce different proportions of finished 
products by changing operating conditions is greater in a complex 
refinery than in a simple one. This is demonstrated in the table 
above which compares the (illustrativej per cent weight yield 
flexibilities for a simple refinery and a complex refinery, both 
running Arab Light crude oil. 
Hydroskimming (simple), semi-complex and complex refineries 
have been described very briefly because these terms are often used 
in the industry. However, many refineries are not pure examples of 
any particular type. For example, many complex refineries, which 
have cat. cracking and visbreaking, have crude distilling capacity 
larger than needed to load these conversion units. Therefore, up to 
the point where their conversion units are loaded they have a 
complex yield but, if they refine more crude, the incremental yield 
will be a hydroskimming yield. 
Furthermore, the crude intake will be set by the varying 
demands for products and by economics so that at times a complex 
refinery may wish to run less crude than is required to load its 
conversion units. All this means that the ability to import and 
export intermediate/feedstock streams can be an important 
flexibility to a refinery. The intermediates most commonly traded 
are naphtha for platforming or petrochemical feed, long (or 
atmospheric) residue for vacuum distillation and cracking and 
vacuum gasoil (or waxy distillate) for cracking. 
Off-plot flexibility 
The factors that make up off-plot flexibility are fairly obvious; e.g. 
good tankage and in-line blending, capacity in berth and loading 
facilities for ships and barges, road and rail loading, etc. There are 
two points to be made about such facilities. First, good facilities are 
expensive so that, if a refinery has them, it must use them to good 
effect. Second, their value as a competitive weapon tends to be 
relative to that of others in the area. An inland refinery, say in 
Eastern Europe, may have little flexibility because it has to receive 
crude down one pipeline and distributes its products mainly 
through other limited pipelines but, if the alternative product 
supply is a long and expensive truck delivery from a distant 
refinery, this lack of flexibility may not be so important. 
Organisational flexibility 
The third component of flexibility was listed as flexibility of mind 
and organisation. This is a subject which can hardly be tackled in a 
chapter on the physical characteristics of oil but it does concern 
traders intimately. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.6/page 17

--- Page 92/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Two functions have to be fulfilled for any refinery to work; that 
of running it, i.e. operating the units, maintaining them, supplying 
the utilities etc.; and that of using the refinery, i.e. planning the 
crude intake, product programme, etc. The latter is often called the 
supply function. However the organisation is set up these functions 
are separate, even if performed by the same individual; the 
operating function must run the refinery as safely and efficiently as 
possible and the supply function must use it to the best economic 
advantage. The functions are often in apparent conflict, e.g. a very 
profitable trading opportunity with, say, low sulphur diesel may 
have to be weighed against the safety of continuing to run a 
desulphurization unit, which is in need of maintenance. 
All that can be said here is that a common overall purpose, 
good understanding and close co-operation between these two 
functions can make a dramatic contribution to refinery 
profitability. The trader, whether in the same company or not, is 
part of the supply function because without active participation in 
trading it is very hard for 'supply' to have a realistic assessment of 
physical trading opportunities and the prices likely to be paid or 
received. 
2.6.8 Economics 
The task of the refinery is to make the products required from the 
crudes and feedstocks available at the lowest cost. Refining costs 
may vary widely between different refineries, but, to put them into 
perspective, a complex or conversion refinery would typically have 
costs as follows: 
$/tonne 
Cash npertating costs 12.0 
Fuel cost 4.5 
Depreciation 2.0 -
Total 18.5 
There are usually about 7.4 barrels of crude per tonne so the above 
is equivalent to US $2.50 per barrel. 
The above costs compare with crude oil costs of about $100 per 
tonne (fob)", Rotterdam gasoline prices of, say, $150 per tonne and 
a retail gasoline price including taxes (in UK) of about $1,000 per 
tonne. Refinery costs are therefore a small proportion of final price. 
* Fob stands for free on hard, i.e. without freight cost. Cif stands for 
cost, insurance and freight., i.e. including freight and insurance. 
2.6lpage 18 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 93/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
However, as margins in the downstream are very slim, variations 
of refinery costs are significant for profitability. 
Depreciation of $2.00 per tonne does little more than cover the 
cost of investment in minor items and replacements. Capital 
employed in such a refinery might easily be reckoned to be $500 
million or more (the replacement cost would be very much higher) 
and a return on this capital of 15 per cent before tax would add a 
charge of $10 per tonne. 
As a refinery's margin is an important measure of its 
performance it is worth giving two very simple examples, which 
can be worked out using the yields given above. 
Hydroskimming Complex 
Max gasoline Max gasoline 
Price Value Value 
($/tonne) ($!'tonne crude) ($/tonne crude) 
Crude oil (ciQ'+. 88 
Crude cost. per tonne 88 88.0 88.0 
IPG 124 1.9 1.9 
Gasoline 136 28.6 51.7 
Jet A7 130 7.8 7.8 
Diesel 121 29.3 35.2 
Fuel oil 60 26.2 11.5 
Fuel and loss 0.0 0.0 
Total product value 93.8 108.1 
Gross refinery margin 5.8 20.1 
Cash operating costs 6.0 12.0 
Operating margin -0.2 +8.1 
The example above, which is based on prices from March 1998, 
illustrates the better margin obtained from a complex refinery. As 
can be seen from the graph of historical margins for North Sea 
Brent Blend in NW Europe shown in Fig 2.10, complex margins are 
generally rather higher than simple margins and the difference 
between simple and complex margins can be very large at times. 
It is also worth noting that it is conventional to take the direct 
use of fuel as a yield loss rather than a separate cost and, therefore, 
the gross refinery margin (GRM) is the margin after subtracting 
the bulk of the fuel costs. 
This convention can be a source of confusion because the 
refinery may use a significant quantity of natural gas as fuel or 
feedstock. If this is the case: the cost of the natural gas should be 
added to the crude cost to obtain the GRM. Also, electric power 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 2.6/page 19

--- Page 94/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
5 - Hydroskimming 
4 
3 
-
?2 2 Q 
& I 
0 
-1 
-2 
Jan-95 Jan-96 Jan-97 Jan-98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 2.10 Refinery margins, Brent Blend NW Europe 
bought in is usually included in cash operating costs, if a refinery 
generates its own power, the cost will be largely in 'own use fuel' 
and the cost analyses of the two cases are not strictly comparable. 
One further note on GRM, it is calculated at the refinery fence and 
commonly on crude processed and products made during a period 
or for a certain quantity of crude (as was done above) using current 
prices. The actual margin in a period is the difference between the 
cost of crude bought and the proceeds of products sold and 
adjustments of stock and value will usually be needed to reconcile 
the two. 
It should also be pointed out that 85 to 90 per cent of the cash 
operating costs are fixed costs, which combined with the high fixed 
capital costs, means that once a refinery or process unit is built it 
will be run, since any margin over the small variable cost 
(including fuel) will make some contribution to the fixed costs. 
2.6Ipage 20 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 95/964 ---
2.7 Environmental factors 
The call for tougher environmental protection measures affects 
everyone. This trend gathered momentum in the 1980s and there 
can be no doubt at all that it is continuing strongly in the 1990s. 
Environmental concerns affect refineries in two ways; 
indirectly through the products they are required to make and 
directly through controls on their own behaviour. 
Many measures have already been implemented in both these 
classes; for instance legislation to reduce or remove the lead content 
of gasolines and limitations on the sulphur dioxide emissions of 
refineries. There are published plans for these controls to become 
more severe in future. 
Each country determines what environmental protection 
measures will be imposed through its product specifications and on 
its refineries, although in the case of refineries and other industrial 
sites, local district authorities often impose their own conditions. 
The EU Council attempts to exercise a co-ordinating role 
through Council Directives. Although these Directives are not 
necessarily fully implemented they do give an indication of the 
environmental control measures which can be expected. The 
European Commission (EC) also encourages and sponsors research 
programmes into technical and cost benefit aspects of 
environmental problems with a view to promoting new 
environmental control measures. One example is the joint oil and 
car industry programme, the European Programme on Emissions, 
Fuels and Engine Technologies (EPEFE), which is studying both 
engine design and fuel specifications and their interaction to find 
the best practical measures for vehicle emission pollution control, 
taking into account a wide range of possible options. 
The following are likely to be subject to tighter controls: 
Oil products 
Gasolines 
Complete removal of lead 
Lower benzene (presently 5 per cent Max, down to 3 per cent 
or 1per cent max) and, possibly, the control of aromatics 
Lower volatility 
Lower sulphur content 
Diesel fuels 
Lower sulphur; to 0.05 per cent weight in 1996, lower still in 
some areas 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.7lpage 1

--- Page 96/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Lower final boiling point (smoke control) 
Lower specific gravity 
Higher cetane number 
Fuel oils 
Lower sulphur content, towards 1per cent max. 
Oil refineries 
0 Lower sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions 
0 Lower particulate emissions 
0 Lower noise levels 
As environmental measures are unevenly applied product 
specifications may be more severe in one country than another and 
refinery costs can also be higher. In Europe environmental 
legislation is probably toughest in Switzerland, Germany and 
Sweden. 
CONCAWE is an oil industry body set up to advise both 
industry and governments on environmental measures. Its head-
quarters are in The Hague and it can be a very useful source of 
information and advice. 
To illustrate the complexity of environmental issues, it is 
worth dealing with two topical examples in more detail: 
reformulated gasolines in the United States and diesel fuel 
particulate emissions in Europe. 
2.7.1 Reformulated gasolines 
In the United States, the 1990 amendment to the Clean Air Act 
(CAA) covered a very wide range of measures to reduce 
environmental damage from oil refineries, utilities, other industries 
and motor vehicles. Its measures are interpreted, developed and 
enforced by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). In the 
area of motor vehicle fuels, the 1990 amendment has two principal 
objectives: 
to reduce carbon monoxide (CO) levels in some 39 urban 
areas designated as "carbon monoxide non-attainment 
areas", where CO levels were higher than those considered 
acceptable, especially in the winter; 
to reduce the levels of ozone in nine areas particularly prone 
to ozone-induced smogs and designated as "extreme ozone 
non-attainment areas". (Ozone is not emitted directly from 
2.7lpage 2 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 97/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
vehicle exhausts: but can be formed from some substances 
that are.) 
To meet the first objective of reducing CO levels, gasolines sold 
in the relevant areas have to contain 2.7 per cent minimum weight 
of oxygen for a minimum period of four months in the winter. The 
oxygen is added to gasoline by blending in "oxygenates", for 
example MTBE (see Section 2.6.6). It has been shown that 
oxygenated gasolines produce exhaust gases with less CO than non- 
oxygenated gasolines. The oxygenated gasoline programme has 
been in operation since November 1992. Some of the original 39 
CO non-attainment areas have now reduced CO to levels that take 
them out of this category, but oxygenated gasolines are -at 
present -still required. 
To meet the second objective of reducing ozone levels, a much 
more complicated set of requirements was (and still is being) 
developed for gasolines. These are the "reformulated gasolines" or 
RFGs. Reformulated gasolines are required all the year round in 9 
areas designated as "extreme ozone non-attainment areas". Areas 
with less severe ozone problems (designated as "severe" to 
"marginal") may opt to take part in the RFG programme and some 
have, although not as many as was originally expected. The concept 
of RFG began in California and this state tends to have the most 
severe restrictions. The first phase of the RFG programme covers 
1995 to 1997 and the second stage from 1997 onwards. 
The specifications for RFG are complex and some of the 
requirements, particularly in the second phase, are not absolutes 
but refer to EPA computer programs and to "Base Line" gasoline 
properties established for 1990. However, a minimum of 2 per cent 
weight oxygen is one requirement. The term RFG should only be 
applied to those more complex specifications needed to meet the 
second objective of reducing ozone formation, but it is sometimes 
used for oxygenated gasolines as well. 
Reformulated gasolines, as developed in the United States, are 
unlikely to be used in Europe for two reasons. First, their 
introduction and application was possible because the EPA has 
nationwide authority -there is no equivalent agency in Europe. 
Secondly, there is considerable doubt as to whether RFGs are a 
cost-effective measure for exhaust pollution abatement. Most people 
believe that the measures required for a long term solution to 
vehicle exhaust emission pollution problems must include changes 
in vehicle design. Such design changes take years to become 
effective because of the slow turnover of the vehicle fleet and so 
short term action was necessary in the US for political reasons. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 2.7lpage 3

--- Page 98/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Also the car industry lobby in the US is more powerful than that of 
the oil industry. 
The start of the RFG programme in the US has greatly 
reduced the export of gasoline from Europe to the US. Not only are 
the RFG specifications difficult to meet, but the documentation and 
detailed knowledge of the different specifications required are 
significant deterrents. 
2.7.2 Diesel engine particulate emissions 
In 1994/95 much attention was focused in Europe on diesel engine 
particulate (mainly solid carbon) emissions and their potential for 
causing -or exacerbating -respiratory problems. But so far there 
is no consensus on this difficult and complex subject. 
First, there has been much discussion about which sizes of 
particle are the most damaging to health and it may be that the 
larger particles, which cause visible smoke from badly maintained 
diesel engines, are not the most dangerous. 
Secondly, the mechanisms of particulate formation in diesel 
engines are not well understood. It is known that both engine 
design and fuel quality have an effect. In the case of fuel quality, 
high density, high final boiling point (FBP), high sulphur content 
and low cetane number tend to increase particulate emissions, but 
the relationships between these individual properties and 
particulate formation and the size distribution of particles are not 
accurately known. 
The concern over particulates may well accelerate the 
tendency for EU countries to insist on lower density, FBP, sulphur 
and higher cetane numbers for diesel fuels. The maximum sulphur 
content for EU diesel fuel will be reduced to 0.05 per cent in 1996, 
but in some areas tax breaks are already given for diesels with a 
maximum sulphur content of 50 or even 10 parts per million (ppm) 
~ ~ the so-called “city diesels” although the technical justification 
for such low sulphur contents seems rather weak. 
The debate over particulates has tended to obscure the more 
positive aspects of diesel engine emissions compared with gasoline 
engines, for example, lower volatile organic compounds (VOC j and 
carbon monoxide (COj emissions, and lower fuel consumption. If 
consumers are ultimately persuaded that diesel engines are less 
environmentally acceptable than gasoline engines -whatever the 
technical evidence -the shifl away from gasolines to diesel fuels, 
already evident in most EU countries in recent years, may slow or 
even be reversed. 
2.7lpage 4 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 99/964 ---
2.8 Measurement, sampling and 
testing 
The measurement, sampling and testing of crude oil and products 
is a large subject and, as many aspects are integral to the contract 
between buyer and seller. traders will need a good knowledge of it. 
This section contains only a brief introduction. 
2.8.1 Measurement 
There are three methods of measuring quantities of oil in general 
use. Measurement of volume in tanks, either on shore or in ships, 
measurement of volume by flow meter and measurement of weight. 
This latter is used only for fairly small lots such as road and rail 
cars. Otherwise, weight has to be calculated from the volume, using 
the temperature and specific gravity. 
Tank Measu rem)eat 
An essential for tank measurement is an accurate calibration of the 
volume in the tank in question against the height of liquid 
measured with a dip tape or automatic level gauge. These 
calibrations are usually made by independent surveyors and should 
be updated occasionally or when inaccuracy appears to be occurring 
since tanks can settle unevenly and suffer small shape changes. 
A good assessment of the temperature of oil in the tank is 
needed since the volume will have to be converted to a standard 
temperature, usually 60°F. The specific gravity will also be needed, 
not only to convert volume to weight, but to use the temperature 
conversion tables issued by the IP or similar bodies, which it is 
standard practice to use. Therefore, the contents of the tank should 
be homogeneous and samples taken at several levels to 
demonstrate this. 
Meter measurement 
Properly installed and maintained turbine meters can give an 
accurate measurement of volume flow through a pipe. Their 
calibration has to be checked at regular intervals by means of a 
proving loop of known volume. Sampling and temperature 
measurement are usually rather simpler and more accurate and 
2.8lpage 1

--- Page 100/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
can be done automatically. This type of measurement is always 
used when blends are made direct into ships. 
The error of volume measurement in loading a ship by either 
tank height or turbine meter is usually about f0.3 per cent. On the 
overall operation of loading followed by discharge at the destination 
the error is about f0.4 per cent. This excludes water measurement. 
Weight measurement 
Accurate weigh bridges can now be built more cheaply and are 
often used for road and rail car oil measurement, especially 
bitumen and other products which are sold by weight and are more 
difficult to measure by meter. 
2.8.2 Sampling and testing 
Tanks are traditionally sampled by lowering a sample bottle into 
the contents, pulling the plug at the desired level and withdrawing 
the bottle. This method only gives good results if the tank and its 
contents are homogeneous and the sampler is conscientious. Poor 
results are often found when testing for RW because it is 
dependent on small quantities of volatile components which can be 
lost in the sampling and subsequent testing. Line samplers, which 
withdraw a continuous 01-intermittent sample from a loading or 
discharge line are usually more satisfactory. 
The most difficult sampling and measuring problem is to get 
an accurate assessment of the water content of an oil, especially 
crude oil. The water is a separate phase and is not necessarily 
evenly distributed through the diameter of a pipe and can also 
travel in slugs. Line sampling is therefore not always accurate. The 
water usually settles well in shore tanks and the height of water 
can be detected by dipping with a measuring tape but the height 
differential of the water phase before and after receiving a cargo 
and settling may be small in a large tank and consequently difficult 
to measure accurately. For crude oil the settling may take time and 
not be even aci-oss the bottom of the tank. 
For an average loading and unloading of crude oil the water 
measurement is assessed to add a further f 0.1 per cent error but 
with some crudes can be much more. 
Refinery laboratories usually provide a certificate of quality 
with the products supplied. This shows the results obtained on 
samples of the product certified against the full range of 
specification tests. Samples are also taken of shore and ship tanks 
when loading or discharge are taking place. Checks are made on 
2.8Ipage 2

--- Page 101/964 ---
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
these samples to ensure contamination is not occurring. Some 
samples are retained in case of later dispute. In many instances an 
inspector independent of both the buyer and seller is appointed to 
verify the quality and the quantity of any sale. Several well known 
companies offer this service. 
For crude oils only API gravity and water content are 
commonly specified and tested. 
2.8/page 3

--- Page 102/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 103/964 ---
Appendix 2.1 
Product properties 
Refinery product Characteristic properties 
LPG Vapour pressure 
Residue (pentanes and higher) 
Gasoline Octane number 
Vapour pre?-sure 
Distill ation 
Hennene content 
Lead content 
Oxygenate content 
Naphtha PONA 
Distillation 
No lead 
Jet kerosine Flash point 
Freezing paint 
Aromatics 
Thermal stabilihy 
Diesel Flash point 
Cold filter plugging point (CFPP) 
Cetane number 
Sulphur content 
Gasoilheating oil Flash point 
Sulphur content 
Pour point 
Fuel oil Flash point 
Viscosity 
Density 
Sulphur content 
Conradsen carbon 
Bitumen Penetration 
R&B softening 
Ductility 
Note: Appearance, specific gravity and water content are usually 
important to all products. Appearance is not, important for fuel oils. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 Appendix Z.l/page 1

--- Page 104/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 105/964 ---
Appendix 2.2 
Crude oil distillation yields 
Crude oil Gravily Sulphur Gases Gasoline/ Kerosine Gasoil/ Atmos. 
Naphtha Diesel Residue 
"API %wt %wt %wt %wt %wt %wt 
North Sea 
Brent Blend 37 0.3 1.8 20.3 12.3 24.6 41.0 
Ekofisk 44 0.1 2.0 32.4 13.6 22.0 30.0 
Plotta 36 1.2 2.1 20.1 11.7 21.9 44.4 
Forties 37 0.3 2.8 19.5 11.7 24.0 42.0 
Oseberg 34 0.3 1.5 17.8 12.6 26.1 42.0 
Statfjord 38 0.2 1.6 23.2 12.5 25.7 37.0 
Mediterranean 
Es Sider 37 0.4 1.2 19.8 9.3 27.7 42.0 
Urals 33 1.4 1.7 17.0: 12.3 21.4 47.0 
Suez Blend 32 1.5 2.0 17.6 12.3 21.4 47.0 
West mica 
Bonny Light 37 0.1 2.0 21.2 13.1 29.7 34.0 
Bonny Medium 25 0.2 0.5 7.0 10.7 34.8 47.0 
Brass River 41 0.1 1.8 26.4 15.5 29.3 27.0 
Porcados 29 0.2 0.6 12.9 12.3 37.2 37.0 
Cabinda Blend 32 0.2 0.5 12.7 7.0: 22.2 57.0 
Arab Gulf 
Arab Light 34 7.8 1.1 18.0 12.3 23.6 45.0 
Arab Heavy 28 2.9 1.8 14.1 9.6 21.5 53.0 
Iran light 34 7.4 1.6 18.5 12.6 23.3 44.0 
Iran Heavy 31 1.7 1.4 17.5 10.8 20.3 50.0 
Murban 40 0.8 0.5 24.7 15.8 25.0 34.0 
Oman 34 1.0 1.0 15.4 12.0 23.1 48.5 
Dubai 31 2.0 1.3 15.4 11.8 22.5 49.0 
Far East 
Minas 35 0.1 0.5 10.8 8.4 22.3 58.0 
Duri 21 0.2 0.1 4.4 6.2 13.3 76.0 
Tapis 44 0.0 0.9 24.3 21.0 36.8 17.0 
Daquing 32 0.1 0.5 8.3 6.3 16.9 68.0 
Americas 
WTI 39 0.4 1.1 23.8 14.8 22.8 37.6 
Bachequero 13 2.9 0.1 2.3 4.1 19.0 74.5 
Notes: see over page 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 Appendix 2.2Ipage 1

--- Page 106/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Notes 
Distillation yields of crude oils are not precise data, so the above 
table should be used only for the purposes of comparison. The 
principal causes of variation are: 
1. Date of sampling and treatment of the sample. The 
percentage of "gases" recorded is particularly subject to 
variation. 
2. The cut points between fractions that are used. The 
percentage of atmospheric residue is particularly 
sensitive to the choice of cut point. The following 
approximate cuts points were used: 
GasolineDIaphtha IBP to 165°C 
Kerosine 165°C to 235°C 
GasoiVDiesel 235°C to 360°C 
Atmospheric Residue more than 360°C 
Appendix 2.2/page 2

--- Page 107/964 ---
Appendix 2.3 
Crude oil assay 
FLOTTA CRUDE 
production and This crude is produced from the Piper. Claymore and Tartan fields in the British 
sector of the North Sea. Following the initial treatment of the oil on theHandling respective offshore platforms, the crude oil is pumped ashore in a common sub- 
sea pipeline to the Flotta terminal in the Orkney Islands. At Flotta the oil is de- 
salted and stabilised prior to storage in floating roof tanks. The stabilised crude 
can be loaded to tankers either through lines to the jetty used for LPG 
shipments, as well orvia the SPM (Single Point Mooring) buoys. 
Type Medium sulphur. Moderate wax. IntermediateiParaffinic. 
GENERAL YIELDS 
CHARACTERISTICS 
LIGHT DISTILLATE TO 165�C VOL 26.6 
MIDDLE DISTILLATE 165-350�C �/, VOL 31.9 
RESIDUE ABOVE 350�C %VOL 41.5 
GRAVITY API 35.6 
SULPHUR %WT 1.19 LOADING PORT DATA 
VISCOSITY AT 2OC CST 6.3 (Current at the time of printing) 
37.BC 4.1 PORT -FLOTTA 
ASH % WT 0.004 SPM JETTY 
SALT MGiL 12 LOA - - -
L6;lOOOBBL 4 DRAUGHT -MAX 75 feet 63 feet 
WATER + SEDIMENT % VOL 0.15 BREADTH - - -
H,S %WT NIL DWT-MMN 35,000 4,000 
POUR POINT �G +3 -MAX 200,000 150,000 
ACIDITY mg koh!g <005 NOM LOAD RATE -
ASPHALTENES % WT 0.35 MA% 80,000 BPH 80.000 BPH 
OTHER - Special regulations also 
apply 
REFINING CHARACTERISTICS 
GENERAL This crude presents no problems in refining and gives a full range of 
specification products. The sulphur content at over 1.0% is higher than the 
general level of crudes from UKCS fields and requires hydrodesulphurisation of 
middle distillates to meet currently accepted standards. 
Flotta crude resembles in many respects Iranian Light and features include: 
Average yield of medium quality middle distillates. 
Good reforming characteristics of naphtha fraction. 
High yield of VGO cracking feedstock. Residual yield of intermediate 
 sulphur content. 
LIGHT NAPHTHA Mercaptan content is nil requiring no sweetening. 
NAPHTHAS Not readily suitable for Ethylene cracking due to low paraffin content. 
Hydrorefined product gives good performance in catalytic reformers. 
Appendix 2.3tpage 1

--- Page 108/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
ATK/KEROSINES Mild sweetening or hydrotreating recommended for regular grades with 
aromatics content and smoke point both near borderline for specifications. 
DIESEL/GASOILS Products of medium cetane index meeting both winter and summer quality are 
yielded after desulphurisation to reduce sulphur from 0.6-0.8% weight. 
RESIDUAL FUELS With 2.2% sulphur in the 350C+ residue, blending into fuel oil pools is 
suggested especially with the reported pour points. Low metals concentrations 
are indicated. The 550C+ residue is extremely short with acceptable metals and 
sulphur but very high pour point. 
CRACKING Full evaluation for cracking potential has not been carried out. However, a wide 
STOCKS cut of catalytic cracker feedstock is indicated with moderate metals content and 
asphaltenes. 
LUBE OILS No evaluation work carried out and not considered warranting any development 
at this stage. 
BITUMENS Not considered suitable for Bitumen production due to high pour point of 
vacuum residue although asphaltene content is relatively high. 
PETROCHEMICALSThe heavy naphtha has good potential for catalytic reformer feedstock for the 
production of BTX aromatics. Not readily suitable for cracking to produce 
ethylene and other higher order alkenes due to low paraffin content. 
DISTILLATE DATA 
DISTILLATES 
TBP CUT POINT �C C5-85 85-1 65 165-235 235-300 300-350 350-550 -
YIELD ON CRUDE %W T 6.53 
%VO L 8.17 
DENSITY AT 1% KGiLlTRE ,6694 
SULPHUR %W T <.01 
MERCAPTAN SULPHUR %WT NIL 
VISCOSITY AT 37.8 C CST -
50 C -
CLOUD POINT C -
POUR POINT C -
CFP POINT C -
COPPER STRIP TEST -
UOP K FACTOR -
AROMATICS %W T ~ 
SMOKE POINT MM -
FREEZING POINT C -
ANILINE POINT C -
CETANE INDEX -
CARBON RESIDUE -
CONRADSON %W T -
RON (CLEAR) 73 
RON (0 59 Pbll Ltr) 88 
MON (CLEAR) 69.7 
MON (0.5g Pbil Ltr) 82.5 
PARAFFINS %W T 69.3 
NAPHTHENES %W T 18.7 
AROMATICS %W T 12.0 
VAN AD IUM PPM WT -
NICKEL PPM WT -
Appendix 2.3lpage 2

--- Page 109/964 ---
- 
- - - 
- 
- 
2 Physical characteristics and refining 
RESIDUE DATA LIGHT 
HYDROCARBONS 
RESIDUES ANALYSIS 
TBP CUT POINT �C TOTAL 350 550 
>RUDE 
YIELD ON CRUDE %WT - 46.4 10.2 METHANE % WT NIL 
%VOL - 41.5 8.3 ETHANE % WT 0.01 
PROPANE % WT 0.50 
DENSITY AT 15C KGiLlTRE ,8462 ,9450 1.040 ISO-BUTANE % WT 0.24 
SULPHUR %WT 1.19 2.2 3.03 N-BUTANE % WT 1.32 
VISCOSITY AT 20C CST 6.34 
37.8C 4.06 --
82.2C - 32.04 2370 TOTAL C1-C4 % WT 2.07 
98.9C - 18.7 844 
ISO-PENTANE % WT 0.86POUR POINT C 3 33 51 N-P E NTAN E % WT 1.62ACIDITY mg KOHiG <0.05 <0.10 <o 10 
ASH %WT 0.004 
CARBON RESIDUE CONRADSON W 
 T ~ 5.5 16.3 
ASPHALTENES %WT 0.35 0.98 5.37 
VANADIUM PPM WT 8.1 16 60 
NICKEL PPM WT 2.7 5.7 23 
I RON PPM WT 1.1 2.6 37 
TBP DATA 
TBP DATA TO 550C 
ASTM 2892 to 370C ASTM D1160 370 to 550C 
CUT POINT C 16 27 58 66.5 70 85 95.5 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %WT 1.8 3.2 5.9 6.5 7.0 8.6 10.3 
%VOL 27 4.7 67 8.7 9.4 11 3 13.3 
CUT POINT C 104 118 128 139 149 165 175 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %W T 12 1 14.0 15 8 17.7 19.5 22 2 24.0 
%VOL 15 4 17.6 19 6 21.6 23.6 26 6 28.6 
CUT POINT C 187 198 210 222 235 249 262 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %W T 25 9 27.8 29 7 31.6 33.9 35 9 37.9 
%VOL 30 6 32.6 34 6 36.6 39.0 41 0 43.0 
CUT POINT C 274 286 300 309 320 330 342 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %WT 39 9 41.9 44 3 46.3 48.3 50 1 52.1 
%VOL 45 0 47.0 49 4 51.4 53.4 55 1 57.1 
CUT POINT C 350 360 370 394 41 7 440 462 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %WT 53 6 55.6 57 4 ----
%VOL 58 5 60.4 62 2 66.0 69.8 73 5 77.3 
CUT POINT C 486 510 532 550 
TOTAL DISTILLATE %WT - - - 89.8 
%VOL 81 1 84.9 88 7 91.7 
COMMENTSiADDlTlONAL INFORMATION 
Appendix 2.3fpage 3

--- Page 110/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Notes 
There is no standard form for a crude oil assay. They may vary 
from a quarter of a page to a booklet. Shorter summary assays as 
published: for example, by the Oil & Gus Journal, are probably the 
most frequently used. 
Appendix 2.3/page 4

--- Page 111/964 ---
Appendix 2.4 
Simple refinery flow diagram 
Intake is shown as 10 rnn tons per year 
(200,000 bpd) for comparison with the 
complex refinery. There are few simple 
refineries with such a high capacity. SULPHUR (30) 
PROPANE (50) 
BUTANE (90) 
PETROCHEMICAL FEED 
(400) 
MOGASES (1,690) 
JETAl (600) 
DIESEL (1,500) 
GASOILS (1,030) 
FUEL OILS (3,660) 
REFINERY FUEL 
& LOSS (400) 
BITUMEN (500) 
Appendix 2.4lpage 1

--- Page 112/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 113/964 ---
Appendix 2.5 
Complex refinery flow diagram 
SULPHUR (60) 
PROPANE (100) 
BUTANE (75) 
PETROCHEMICAL 
FEED (1001 
MOGASES (3,nsoj 
JET FUEL (600) 
DIESEL (l,ti5zj 
GASOILS (1,030) 
REFINERY 
FUEL & LOSS (600) 
BITUMEN (sou) 
Appendix 2.5Ipage 1

--- Page 114/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 115/964 ---
Appendix 2.6 
Further reading 
The Petroleum Handbook 
Shell, 6th Edition, 1983, Elsevier 
A straightforward, technically oriented, description of all phases of 
the oil industry. Clear, comprehensive and with good diagrams and 
illustrations. 
Our In,dustry Petroleum 
British Petroleum, 5th Edition, 1977, BP 
Similar to Shell's Petroleum Handbook, but older and more 
company oriented. 
Petroleurn Refining for the Non-technical Person 
Leffler, William L., 2nd Edition, 1985, PennWell Books 
A description of hydrocarbon chemistry and oil refining processes. 
Clear, technical with little of economics. 
Petroleum Refinery Process Economics 
Maples, Robert E., 1993, PennWell Books 
Good descriptions and flow diagrams of refinery processes, together 
with much product yield and cost data. 
Modern Petroleum 
Berger, Bill D. and Kenneth Anderson, 3rd Edition, 1992, 
PennWell Books 
Technical description of the whole industry aimed at the non-
technical person. Useful chapters on storage, measurement and 
refining. 
Modern Petroleum Technology 
Hodson, G.D. (ed), 1984, 2 volumes, Institute of Petroleum 
Full technical description of refining processes and product 
properties (and other industry topics). 
Appendix 2.6fpage 1

--- Page 116/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The Chemistry and Technology of Petroleum 
Speight, James G.(Exxon), 1980,2 volumes, Marcel Dekker 
Comprehensive description of oil and gas processing. 
The Illustrated Dictionary, Petroleum Reference 
Langekamp, Robert D., 2nd edition 1982, PennWell Books 
A good example of the many books of oil industry terms and jargon. 
This one includes abbreviations and conversion factors. 
Paul Frankel: Common Carrier of Common Sense 
Skeet, Ian (ed), 1989, Oxford University Press 
A good selection of Paul Frankel's writings on the more 
fundamental, long-term aspects of oil supply and demand. 
Oil and Gas Dictionary 
Stevens, Paul, 1988, Richard Clay 
Another good dictionary of terms. 
Standard Methods for Analysis and Testing of Petroleum and 
Related Products 
Institute of Petroleum, 1994,2 volumes, John Wiley & Sons 
Lays down, in full detail, IP test methods. 
ASTM Standards, Section 5 
American Society for Testing Methods, updated annually 
Covers ASTM test methods. Complete description as above. 
Oil & Gas Journal Data Book 
Oil & Gas Journal, published annually, PennWell Books 
Lists of oil companies, oil fields and refineries with brief details. 
IP Petroleum Measurement Manual 
Institute of Petroleum, about 20 separate volumes 
Authoritative methods for measurement. 
ManuaL of Petroleum Measurement Standards 
API, American Petroleum Institute 
Especially chapters 1-17. Similar to the IP Manual. 
Appendix 2.6/page 2

--- Page 117/964 ---
3oil pricing arrangements 
Catherine Hamer 
3.1 Types of pricing mechanism 
3.2 Fixed prices 
3.2.1 Outright prices 
3.2.2 official selling pi-ices 
3.2.3 Posted prices 
3.2.4 Wholesale 01-rack prices 
3.3 Floating prices 
3.3.1 Fixed differential to published prices 
3.3.2 Fixed differential to futures prices 
3.3.3 Floating differential to published or futures prices 
3.3.4 Pricing against a basket 
3.3.5 Exchange of futures for physical (EFP) 
3.3.6 Asian Petroleum Price Index (APPI) 
3.4 Applying pricing mechanisms 
3.4.1 Russian products 
3.4.2 Unleaded gasoline 
3.4.3 Syrian crude oil 
3.4.4 Price swap 
3.5 Sources of price information 
3.5.1 Mechanisms of price gathering 
3.5.2 Use of price reports 
3.5.3 Pitfalls 
3.5.4 Publications 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 118/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 119/964 ---
3.1 Types of pricing mechanism 
An essential requirement for successful oil trading is that buyer 
and seller can reach an agreement on price -or at least an agreed 
mechanism for determining price. However, this is not as simple as 
agreeing to sell at a fixed price x. Many variables, not least of all 
the currency and the unit of measurement (volume or weight), 
must be agreed before a contract can be signed. 
The basis on which oil is priced has changed markedly over the 
past 20 years with the development of new techniques for oil 
trading. In the past, the majority of internationally traded oil was 
sold on a term basis at a fixed price. Term contracts were typically 
agreed for a period of a year or more and prices and volumes were 
reviewed periodically. This worked fine while prices remained 
reasonably static. But as political developments and supply 
disruptions made prices more volatile, sellers and buyers both 
recognised that a fixed price could be way out of line with the 
market price at the time the oil was moved. As a result, the market 
developed more flexible, or 'floating' pricing mechanisms. 
Floating prices were usually linked to a published quotation, or 
the average of a set of published quotations, around the time the 
vessel loaded or discharged. Term supplies could still be agreed for 
an extended period of time, but the price of each cargo lifted under 
the term commitment would vary depending on the market prices 
at the time of loading or discharge. 
Thus a seller would no longer find that his fixed price, perhaps 
agreed LO months ago, was considerably lower than he could get for 
the oil at the time of delivery. Under a fixed price regime, he might 
have been tempted to renege on his original, but now loss making, 
deal. Conversely, a buyer would not find that he could buy oil on 
the spot market considerably cheaper at the time of delivery than 
the fixed price he had agreed several months previously. 
As the market moved away from term supplies, more oil 
became available on a spot basis. Although negotiations centred on 
a single cargo rather than several loading over a period of time, the 
loading date might still be some time in the future. Meanwhile, 
market prices could still move dramatically. As a result, buyers and 
sellers turned increasingly to floating price formulae. 
In the last fifteen years, the introduction of forward (paper) 
markets, futures, options and swaps has meant that floating prices 
have become the primary mechanism by which oil is priced. 
However, the floating price mechanisms have become increasingly 
sophisticated and complex, especially in the forward or paper 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 S.l/page 1

--- Page 120/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
markets, and pricing mechanisms have become increasingly 
separated from the actual physical cargo of oil. Indeed, one popular 
way of pricing oil is to use EFPs, the 'exchange of futures for 
physicals', or its swaps market equivalent, an EFS (see Chapter 8). 
Using these pricing mechanisms, the price to the buyer and seller 
can be different since each party can place or lift its associated 
futures position at a different time. 
As 'paper' trading has developed and the liquidity of the 
markets grown, oil has increasingly been treated as a standardised 
commodity, which means that discussions between parties need 
only focus on price -or the pricing mechanism -and timing. At 
the same time, the development of pricing services has greatly 
increased the transparency of the markets. In some respects, this 
has made it easier to gauge the market price for a standard oil 
'commodity'. However, much of the oil traded is not of standardised 
lots, but varies in quality, quantity, location, timing, etc. Such 
cargoes must be accurately valued relative to the standardised 
grades quoted by the pricing services, before floating formulae 
based on published price quotes can be used effectively. 
Despite this trend towards floating prices, there is still a 
market for fixed prices amongst those end users, be they refiners or 
consumers, who need to know what their feedstock costs will be 
over a period. For example, a refiner may have sold petroleum 
products forward at a given price and wants to lock in a refining 
margin by buying his crude at a fixed price. Or a heating oil 
distributor might want to know at what level to set his heating oil 
prices to his customers over the next year. Because he obviously 
does not want to run the risk of buying at a higher price than he 
can sell at, he may ask his supplier to sell the heating oil to him at 
a fixed price, either on a term basis or as a spot cargo. In this way 
he can fix his costs, and guarantee his customers that their bills 
will not increase over, say, the next 12 months. 
The requirement to fix future fuel costs has led to the 
emergence of a 'swaps' market. This adds further pricing flexibility 
because it offers a buyer of physical oil the possibility of continuing 
to take the oil from his supplier at a floating price, and yet insure 
himself against later adverse price movements. He may, for 
instance, have a long-standing relationship with a reliable supplier 
like a major oil company. Asking this kind of supplier for a fixed 
pricing mechanism might jeopardise the relationship by confusing 
the supplier, accustomed to the more established floating price 
basis. (There are notable exceptions amongst some of the major oil 
companies.) The oil buyer may choose to offload his price risk onto a 
third party who will provide, or swap, a fixed price against the 
floating price agreement. Typically, the third party does not make 
3.lIpage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 121/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
any delivery of oil, but provides an insurance against risk, by fixing 
the price. The third party will, in turn, often hedge his risk in the 
futures or options markets. It should be noted that the buyer is not 
only protected against adverse price movements but is also unable 
to take advantage of profitable price movements. If the buyer wants 
to fix a maximum purchase price, but still be able to take advantage 
of lower prices, an alternative strategy would be to purchase a call 
option (see Chapter 9). 
Thus the pricing of oil would appear to have gone full circle. 
The difference now is that fixed pricing, although undergoing a 
small specialised resurgence in interest, is only one of many pricing 
mechanisms available to a sophisticated oil trader. Whilst some oil 
is sold at a fixed price per unit volume or weight, increasingly the 
price is calculated from a formula based on published or futures 
prices. Although a pricing arrangement may not always be based 
on published prices, the organisations involved in producing daily, 
or even hourly, price reports continue to wield what some people 
see as too much power, 01-at least a level of power out of proportion 
to their expertise and knowledge. 
The growth of activity on the regulated and highly visible 
futures exchanges has gone some way towards diluting the power 
wielded by the pricing services. However, exchange-traded futures 
and options contracts are only available for a very limited range of 
crudes and refined products and these can never replace the much 
wider set of information provided by the pricing services. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.ltpage 3

--- Page 122/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 123/964 ---
3.2 Fixed prices 
3.2.1 Outright prices 
A contract for the sale of a cargo of oil must specify, as well as the 
basic price; the guaranteed quality and agreed price adjustment for 
quality deviations, availability date range, where it is available, 
whether it includes freight and insurance and, where relevant, the 
question of duty (see Chapter 16). While there are other factors 
which can affect the actual cost of the oil, such as credit terms, the 
above factors will adequately describe what generally makes up the 
price of acargo of oil. Many of these factors apply whether the price 
agreed is fxed or based on a formula, and this must be borne in 
mind when considering the following pricing mechanisms. 
Quality 
A seller may agree to sell an amount of oil of a particular 
guaranteed quality at a fixed price to a buyer, say gasoil at $170 
per metric tonne. However, this may not be the final price paid for 
the oil. Many prices include an escalator/de-escalator clause, 
providing for price changes in case the quality of oil loaded deviates 
from that contracted for. 
For example, gasoil in Europe is generally sold at x dollars per 
metric tonne, based on a specific gravity of 0.845. If the final 
gravity is 0.850 then the price will be reduced in proportion to the 
increase in gravity, i.e. the heavier the material the less valuable 
the product. The actual gravity will still need to be within the 
specification range acceptable for a product of marketable quality, 
otherwise the cargo will be considered outside the agreed 
specification, and the contract might be considered invalid. 
The escalatoride-escalator may riot only be based on gravity 
but could be based on actual sulphur level, cold properties (pour 
point, cloud point), octane, viscosity, etc. In fact, anything can be 
used as an escalatodde-escalator, even the date of loading or 
discharge. A buyer and seller may agree that for each day’s delay 
after an agreed date range, the price may be reduced by a given 
amount. 
The important qualities for crude oil are generally gravity, 
measured in API degrees, metals content and sulphur. Any or all of 
For example, Russian straight-run fuel oil (E4), see Section 5.2. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.2tpage 1

--- Page 124/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
these factors may be used to alter the final price paid for the crude 
oil should the quality vary from the contractual grade. An example 
of this might be Russian crude oil, Urals, which due to political and 
technical problems can vary on sulphur and metals. A prudent 
buyer might insist on an escalatodde-escalator clause in his 
contract. Even so, the oil should not vary so much as to make it 
unsuitable for the purpose for which it is intended. Clear 
limitations for critical specifications should still be set to ensure it 
is ofmarketable quality. 
Currency 
Crude is generally traded internationally in US dollars per barrel -42 US gallons -although there is no reason why another 
currency should not be used if both parties agree. Indeed, in barter 
arrangements the oil may be paid for in tractors, livestock or any 
other commodity. In Europe, oil products that are being traded 
internationally are generally sold in US dollars per metric tonne. In 
the US, cents per gallon are used for clean products (gasoline, jet, 
naphtha, gasoil) and dollars per barrel are used for dirty products 
(fuel oils). In the Far East, US dollars per barrel are used, except 
for fuel oils and naphtha which are quoted in US dollars per metric 
tonne. 
Inland domestic markets generally price the oil in local 
currency and units. For example, the UK prices gasoil in pence per 
lit.re whereas France uses French francs per litre. 
However, none of the prices is valid unless accompanied by the 
specifications applicable to the quality of oil being priced. 
Therefore, to say that the price of crude oil is $lS/barrel is 
meaningless unless one says that the crude oil referred to is, for 
instance, Brent, West Texas Intermediate tWTIj or Dubai. 
Timing 
The timing of the oil's availability is often critical. Crude may be 
required at a refinery by a particular date otherwise stocks -
which are always kept close to an operational minimum in order to 
reduce costs -may drop too low, causing throughputs to be 
cutback or the refinery to be shut down. Conversely, products may 
have to be lifted fi-om the refinery by a specified date otherwise 
storage tanks will be full, forcing the refinery to cut runs. 
At certain times of the year, timing can also have a significant 
impact on pricing because the market is either in backwardation or 
contango. Backwardation is when the price of a commodity 
available on a prompt basis is higher than that for deferred 
3.2lpage 2 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 125/964 ---
I 
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
30 T Backwardation . . . . . .. 1995 
~ 1996 
-199720 
15 
P 
= 10gto, 
5 
0 
1+ Contango ’ 
-1 0 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jui Aug Sep Oct Nav Dec 
Source: IPE 
Figure 3.1 IPE gasoil, nearby minus first delivery month 
delivery. This situation often occurs with gasoline on the US 
futures market, the Nymex (New York Mercantile Exchange), 
during the summer months. Since the driving season in the 
northern hemisphere is considered to end in September, demand 
for gasoline, and thus the price, tails off towards the end of the 
year. 
Example: Oil futures markets in backwardation, 14 May 1997 
Delivery month Nymex WTI crude Nymex gasoline 
$/barrel cents/US gallon 
June '97 21.39 64.38 
July ’97 21.29 63.36 
August ’97 21.16 62.36 
Sept.ember ’97 21.04 61.26 
Contango is when the commodity is cheapest in the prompt 
position and gets progressively more expensive in the future. This 
typically occurs for gasoil with the approach of summer, since 
demand for gasoil is heaviest in the heating season (see Fig. 3.1). 
Thus when gasoline is in backwardation, gasoil may be in contango, 
and vice versa. Therefore, when setting the price of oil, 
specifications should include not only its quality but also its 
delivery date range -e.g. whether it is prompt or deferred. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.2lpage 3

--- Page 126/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Market pressures have prompted some producers to offer late 
or early pricing in order to attract buyers. Nigeria, for example, 
offers flexible date ranges during which buyers can price their 
purchases (see Chapter 4).Instead of pricing a cargo five days after 
the date of the bill of lading (b/l), the buyer can either price it over 
a five day period starting 14 days after b/l or the five days 
preceding b/l. Other producers allow buyers to use the average of 
the month preceding or following bA. These flexible date ranges 
allow purchasers to take advantage of a contango or backwardation 
in the crude oil market and to manage their price exposure more 
efficiently. 
Example: Oil futures markets in contmgo, 10 July 1997 
Delivery month IPE gasoil Nymex heating oil 
$/metric tonne centsLJS gallon 
Au.wst '97 161.75 52.1 1 
September ’97 164.00 52.79 
October '97 166.25 53.59 
November '97 168.25 54.49 
Location 
Another factor affecting price is the location of the oil. With crude 
this is generally fob (fi-ee on board) at the export terminal 
connected to the oil field. However, some crude oils are moved to 
the end of a pipeline to make them more easily accessible and if so, 
this must be specified when the price is agreed because it will affect 
the buyer's freight costs and therefore the value of this crude to 
him. For example, Iranian crude oil is either available fob Kharg 
Island in the Mideast Gulf, 01-fob Sidi Kerir at the Mediterranean 
end of the Sumed pipeline in Egypt (see Chapter 4). 
On the other hand, similar quality products could be available 
all over the world produced by a number of different refineries. 
Whilst many are sold fob at the refinery, many more may be sold cif 
(including carriage, insurance and freight) at any one of hundreds 
of ports, pipelines or terminals. Thus the price of a cargo of Russian 
gasoil fob the Baltic, will be different from the price of the same 
cargo of gasoil cif Rotterdam. 
Taxes and duties 
Some markets require duty to be paid on oil when imported into the 
country. In the US, refined product prices are generally quoted 
3.2lpage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 127/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
‘inside duty‘, i.e. duty is included in the price quoted. The amount 
can be quite large, amounting to as much as 5 per cent of the total 
price. Hence, prices pertaining to these markets must specify 
whether or not the price includes duty. 
Credit terms 
Other, less transparent, factors may govern whether one deal on 
offer is more attractive than another. In a highly competitive 
buyers’ market, such as at the beginning of 1998, these non-price 
factors become particularly important. For example, varying the 
credit terms to give the buyer extended credit provides a useful 
incentive to prospective purchasers as well as disguising the true 
cost of the oil when it is reported to senior management or 
government agencies. 
3.2.2 Official selling prices 
Until the mid-1980s most internationally traded crude oil, except 
that of US origin, sold on term contracts and was priced at an 
official selling price. This price was set, originally annually, by the 
Government, Government agency or National Oil Company of each 
producing country. The official selling prices (OSPs) generally 
reflected the market value of these crudes at the time the OSPs 
were set, but were only changed infrequently. 
After the Iranian revolution, when spot prices rose to 
$40/barrel and above, producers were reluctant to fulfil their supply 
obligations at the lower OSP, and many reneged on their contracts 
to take advantage of higher spot prices. Once the oil market 
weakened in the early 1980s and prices started falling, the spot 
prices were frequently below term prices. As prices declined, it 
became the buyers’ turn to try wriggling out of long term fixed 
price contracts. 
Recognising that a yearly review was inadequate, and 
responding to buyers’ requests, some countries, such as Mexico, 
Egypt and the former USSR, started setting their OSPs monthly 
thus moving towards spot pricing. In addition, North Sea producers 
who had to pay Petroleum Revenue Tax on the actual revenue 
received, started selling at OSP when the spot price was above, and 
at spot prices when these were below OSP. In this way, an 
increasing amount of oil reached the spot market to be sold at 
market prices, fluctuating around OSP. 
Now few producers sell their crude at a fixed OSP. Whilst 
many will still quote an official price for their crude, the price a 
refiner actually pays for this crude is generally set at a premium or 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.2tpage 5

--- Page 128/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
a discount to the OSP, the difference being achieved through 
negotiations and dependent on destination, either on a term basis, 
or for each cargo lifted. 
Official selling prices exist now in a variety of forms and 
although mainly used by the Opec producers, are also used by some 
non-Opec producers such as Egypt, Oman, and Malaysia (see 
Appendix 4.1). Most OSPs are now based on a fixed differential to a 
floating price. Saudi Arabia, for example, announces the next 
month's price formula at the beginning of the preceding month. The 
formula varies depending on the destination, and may also vary 
with market conditions and wider political developments. Prices 
may, for instance, be lowered in an attempt to buy a larger share of 
a given geographical market or in order to send a political signal to 
other Opec members who may have started cheating on agreed 
production quotas. 
Saudi crude which is to be moved into the Far East may be 
priced against 'the mean of the means' of quotes over a period of 
time for Oman crude and Dubai crude. On the other hand, Oman 
and Qatar set their prices retroactively, normally against Dubai 
quotations and possibly dated Brent. At the beginning of one 
month, they will announce at what level they will price all crude 
lifted under contract for the preceding month. Some crudes are 
restricted on destination in that the pricing formula only applies if 
the crude is moved into a specific region. In addition, many 
producers do not allow their crudes to be on-sold to traders, but 
insist that they be refined by the buyer. 
OSPs may be used for certain oil products, but their 
importance fluctuates a great deal with the market. If the market is 
short of that particular quality of oil then the seller may hold out 
for higher prices. 
3.2.3 Posted prices 
Posted prices are peculiar to the US market (see Chapter 4). By 
law, every refinery is required to post at the refinery gate the price 
at which they will buy crude oil. These prices fluctuate from day to 
day, depending on the market, and between refiners who will place 
adifferent value on each crude depending on their circumstances. 
These posted prices can be used by two parties to agree a price 
for a deal of crude oil. For example, a seller may have a cargo of 
crude which he wants to sell at an average of all the posted prices 
plus a quality differential. The buyer prefers to exclude the posted 
price of two refiners who he thinks are not representative of the 
market, and so the price is apeed based on a more limited number 
of posted prices. 
3.2fpage 6 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 129/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
3.2.4 Wholesale or rack prices 
The price at which a road tanker, for example, can purchase fuel 
when loading from a refinery or depot, is known as the wholesale 
price in Europe. In the US: the road tanker will drive to a 'rack' 
and thus the wholesale price is referred to as the rack price. 
Wholesale or rack prices are quoted, in local currency, by many 
pricing organisations, although coverage is particularly good in the 
US. The price is specific not only to the quality of oil concerned, but 
also to the location, and therefore one country may have many 
different wholesale prices for a particular quality of oil. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.2tpage 7

--- Page 130/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 131/964 ---
3.3 Floating prices 
As oil prices became more volatile, buying or selling oil at fixed 
prices became more problematic as there was increasing 
uncertainty about the value of the oil at the time it was to be loaded 
or discharged. A producer, selling a cargo of crude at $25/barrel on 
one day, might find that by the time the cargo of oil was actually 
lifted, the value of that oil could have gone up by $2/barrel. This 
dissuaded them from selling oil at a fixed price too soon before 
loading. However, the buyer and seller did not want to leave their 
positions open until the last minute for fear of being seen in a 
distressed position, and therefore forced to accept prices away from 
the normal market. 
They therefore looked for a way of concluding a deal well 
before the cargo moved, but using a pricing basis which would 
reflect the market at the time the cargo actually moved. As the oil 
market moved away from fixed prices, and looked towards market 
related prices so a pricing formula based on published prices 
developed. This meant that the price actually paid could more 
closely reflect the market value of the oil at the time of moving the 
oil, rather than the value on the day it. was sold. 
More recently, the growth of the forward, futures, swaps and 
options markets has encouraged buyers and sellers to be more 
innovative with their pricing mechanisms. For example, refiners 
often prefer to price their crude purchases over the same time 
period as they are selling their products, thus obtaining a natural 
hedge to lock in a refining margin. The crude itself may be priced at 
a differential to dated Brent, so the seller can hedge the additional 
price exposure by using a combination of futures (IPE Brentj and 
swaps (Brent CFDs). 
Pricing formulae are now so numerous as both buyers and 
sellers try to protect themselves against undue price fluctuations 
after concluding deals, that it would be impossible to even mention 
all the variations. However, some examples are included later in 
this chapter. 
3.3.1 Fixed differential to published prices 
The first publication to quote international oil prices regularly was 
Platt’s which started in the 1930s, and thus it was PEatt’s published 
prices which were first used for pricing. However, the emergence of 
the spot market for oil in the 1980s prompted several new 
organisations to start up oil price reports. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.3tpage 1

--- Page 132/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Even so, Platt’s continues to dominate the international oil 
market when it comes to pricing formulae based on published 
prices. There are some notable exceptions, e.g. Loridon Oil Reports 
has been used for some feedstock prices, and Petroleurn Argus has 
been used by the former Soviet Union to price their fuel oil. In 
addition, some crudes are sold by producing nations based on a 
5050 split of Platt’s and Argus or LOR quotations, and Reuters and 
Bridge Telerate prices have also been used. In general, though, the 
market seems reluctant to break Platt’s stranglehold on the oil 
market with respect to pricing, a role which Plutt’s claims to accept 
re1 uctantly. 
Thus Platt’s retains the ability to set oil market prices rather 
than just report them, Platt’s dominance of market prices has been 
weakened by the success of futures markets for oil in New York and 
London. But other markets which do not yet have formal futures 
markets, such as jet and fuel oil, can be influenced by the Platt’s 
prices quoted each evening which are also used as a basis for the 
thriving swaps markets in these products (see Chapter 10). Many 
deals are done at a differential to Platt’s or other published prices. 
A transaction may, for instance, be concluded based on the mean of 
the means of Platt’s and Argws high and low quotations for high 
sulphur fuel oil cif NWE as quoted on the bill of lading date, plus a 
premium of $1 per metric tonne. 
The above example only uses the published prices on one day, 
that of the bill of lading date. By using the prices published on only 
25 24 
-Dated Brenl 
23 - 11 day awage 
22 21
-
a,2 20 
& 
19 18 
17 16 
15 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nav Oec 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 3.2Dated Brent, spot and rnouing auerage prices, 1997 
3.3fpage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 133/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
one day, the participants in the deal leave themselves open to 
one-off price rises or falls, or even scope for somebody to manipulate 
the published price, and therefore the price payable. In an attempt 
to minimise this, publication related prices may be based on a 
spread of published prices, such as the mean of the published prices 
on the bill of lading date plus and minus two working days, a mean 
of five published prices from each publication. Crude oil is often 
priced on an average of 11prices, that is the price on bill of lading 
date plus/minus 5 working days (see Fig. 3.2). 
Some traders use publication-related prices based on a mean of 
different quotes, such as the mean of the mean of cif gasoil cargoes 
NWE and fob gasoil barges ARA. 
Over half of the internationally traded crude oils are quoted at 
a differential to Brent, since this crude is the most widely traded 
crude in the international oil market and therefore felt to be 
sufficiently transparent to be a valid benchmark (see Chapter 4). 
Another underlying factor, especially important in the early days of 
price volatility, is that Brent, coming from a politically stable 
democracy, has been a reliable source of crude oil supply. Brent is 
thought to be of a consistent quality, and not to vary over time. 
Therefore, any change in the differential to Brent for a given crude 
will reflect the relative market interest in that crude compared to 
Brent. 
4 
2 
0 
0 
-2 
0 
I & 
-4 
-6 
-8 
-10 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE 
Figure 3.3 Gasoil, nearby IPE minus ARA barges, 1997 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.3fpage 3

--- Page 134/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
3.3.2 Fixed differential to futures prices 
Rather than using published prices on which to base a formula, 
some deals may be based on a fixed differential to futures prices. In 
this case, both the differential and the method by which the 
absolute futures price is to be determined must be agreed at the 
time of concluding the deal. For example, it may be the settlement 
price of a given futures contract at the close of business on the date 
of the bill of lading (b/l). Or, the parties may agree 'last traded 
price' on the futures screen. This type of pricing mechanism has 
been known as 'trigger pricing', and gives either the buyer or the 
seller the option to choose when to set market price. The popularity 
of trigger pricing has waned recently, as people have recognised the 
opportunity for either party to manipulate the marker price ahead 
of the trigger being pulled, but it is still used. 
It is vital that all these details be agreed at the time the deal is 
struck, and that no loopholes be left open that may cause problems, 
and possible law suits, at a later stage. 
An extension to this type of pricing is the exchange for physical 
deals where a cargo of physical oil is sold to a buyer, who in return 
gives the seller a position on the futures market. The price of the 
physical oil will be determined by a previously agreed differential to 
the futures price (see Section 3.3.5 below). 
3.3.3 Floating differential to published or futures prices 
Rather than agreeing a fixed differential to a published or futures 
price, a formula may be agreed to calculate the differential. For 
example, one may price a cargo of crude at Platt’s published 
differential of the relevant grade to Brent on the bill of lading. This 
may also be applied to the IPE futures price for Brent. 
3.3.4 Pricing against a basket 
In order to avoid an over reliance on the price of a particular 
marker crude or product which could be vulnerable to 
manipulation, a basket of quotes may be used. For example, dated 
Brent cargoes with a fixed loading date could be squeezed if one 
trader buys all the available physical Brent cargoes and then starts 
artificially to raise the price. So a crude which might otherwise be 
priced against Brent alone might be priced against an average of 
dated Brent, Forties and Ekofisk. This type of formula is, however, 
mainly used in transactions between producers rather than on the 
spot market. Even so, some US importers of West African crudes 
occasionally use a diversity of pricing baskets to ensure 
3.3lpage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 135/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
geographical supply dislocations in one area will not impact unduly 
on prices in another. 
Another extension of this type of pricing is to agree the 
percentage of each published price which is to apply. For example, 
vacuum gasoil, a feedstock, may be priced as a percentage of the 
gasoline quotation, plus a percentage of the gasoil quotation on bill 
of lading, the total percentages not necessarily adding up to 100. 
Feedstocks and chemical components are often priced in this way, 
since many of these more specialised, less traded and therefore less 
transparent products are not quoted in absolute terms by price 
reporting organisations. 
3.3.5 Exchange of futures for physical (EFP) 
EFPs provide an alternative (and more formal) method of pricing a 
cargo of oil at a differential to the futures market. Instead of using 
an agreed published futures price, the buyer and seller either 
create or utilise existing futures positions that match their 
exposure on the physical oil market. On an agreed date the buyer 
(of the physical cargo) transfers ownership to the seller (of the 
physical cargo) of a number of futures contracts, equivalent or as 
close as possible to the volume of the cmgo of oil. The value of the 
futures contracts at the agreed time when the transfer is made is 
used, together with the agreed differential to the futures contracts, 
to calculate the price of the physical oil, which is then paid for in 
the normal way, depending on the credit terms in the contract. 
Taking this deal in isolation, the seller then becomes long futures 
contracts and the buyer short futures contracts at the agreed level. 
There are a number of advantages to pricing oil in this way. It 
allows two parties in the oil market, one who is long oil and one 
who is short, and who may both have the same views as to where 
the market is going, to reach agreement on a deal. They can do this 
by playing the futures market before and after the transaction of 
the deal, taking or closing their futures positions when they want 
to, and therefore effectively pricing the cargo when they want in 
smaller lots. Most traders rarely want to take large open positions, 
but sometimes liquidity in the futures market is insufficient for 
them to hedge a full cargo in one go without distorting screen 
prices. In such cases, EFP pricing may discreetly square each 
party's position without affecting floor prices. 
There are many more sophisticated pricing techniques 
involving options, swaps and futures (see Chapters 8, 9 and 10). 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.3tpage 5

--- Page 136/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
3.3.6 Asian Petroleum Price Index (APPI) 
In the Far East, crude oil is commonly priced in relation to the 
Asian Petroleum Price Index (APPI). APPI prices are established by 
a panel of market participants representing crude producers, 
refiners and traders who are active in the Far East oil market. 
APPI prices are also used to calculate the official Indonesian crude 
prices (ICPs) issued by Pertamina that are used both to price term 
sales and to assess the upstream tax owed by Indonesia's crude oil 
producers (see Chapter 4). 
The APPI panel members now supply prices twice a week for a 
range of local crude oils to an independent agent (Peat Marwick). 
The submissions are then averaged after removing the highest and 
lowest prices and published every Tuesday and Thursday. The 
crudes quoted come from Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, 
China and Australia together with key imported grades such as 
Dubai, Oman, Murban, Arab Light and Arab Heavy. 
The fact that APPI prices are only published twice a week 
limits their usefulness compared with the more frequent daily price 
reports produced by organisations such as Platt’s and Petroleum 
Argus, especially during volatile market conditions. Another more 
serious limitation is the composition of the panel which contributes 
the market prices. In general, APPI prices have turned out to be 
lower than the spot market prices published by the price reporting 
agencies and spot transactions are often concluded at APPI prices 
plus a premium. Refiners obviously have an interest in lower 
prices. But it is often forgotten that crude producers also have an 
interest in keeping APPI prices low since upstream taxes are often 
based on APPI prices. 
It has been suggested that panel prices constructed in the 
same way as the APPI could also be used in Europe, but 
participants have not been enthusiastic and the European market 
continues to rely heavily on Platt’s prices, which -despite some 
criticisms -remain the basis for many crude oil deals employing 
price formulae. However, there is a move to make increased use of 
IPE Brent futures prices which some companies now regard as 
more representative of actual market prices. 
3.3lpage 6 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 137/964 ---
3.4 Applying pricing mechanisms 
3.4.1 Russian products 
Russian gasoil 
Russian gasoil is generally sold on a Platt�s related pricing formula 
using a basket of quotes, namely 50 per cent cif cargoes for gasoil 
and 50 per cent fob barges for gasoil, structured in the following 
way. 
The price of the cargo cif NWE is calculated from the mean of 
means of the cif cargoes and fob barges for NWE and Rotterdam for 
the 0.2 quotation for gasoil (0.2 per cent sulphur) as published by 
Platt�s on the bill of lading date, plus an agreed premium (or 
discount). 
If we take a specific example of a deal concluded on 16 July for 
25,000 metric tonnes of Russian gasoil loading 22-24 July at a price 
of mean of the means plus $1.25. The buyer of the oil, a trader, sells 
on to an end consumer. This could be done at a fixed price or back 
to back (that is the same formula as it is being bought plus a 
premium). Alternatively, an EFP to gasoil futures on the IPE at a 
premium to the August futures might have been agreed. However, 
for the sake of simplicity, this option will not be considered in this 
chapter, but will be fully covered later in the manual. 
Let us look at the trader‘s options and work through what each 
option might yield in terms of profit. 
Say he has the option of selling the cargo before loading at a 
fixed price on 20 July of $169 per metric tonne. On that day he 
could also sell the cargo on a back to back basis of the mean of 
means on b/l plus $1.75. 
The trader does not know what the cargo will cost him until it 
loads. On the 20th he has been given an anticipated loading date of 
the 22nd, but he strongly feels that the market will go down 
between now and then. He decides to sell at the fixed price of $169 
per metric tonne. Platt�s on that day is as follows: 
cif cargoes NWE 165 -167 
mean of 166 
fob barges Rott,erdam 166 -168 
mean of 167 
mean of means 166.5 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.4tpage 1

--- Page 138/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The cargo loads and has a b/l date of the 22nd. Platt�s of that day 
quotes for the 0.2 per cent gasoil is as follows: 
cif cargoes NWE 163-165 
mean of 164 
fob barges Rotterdam 163-164.5 
mean of 163.75 
mean of means 163.875 
Therefore the cost of the oil to the trader is $163.875 plus a 
premium of $1.25 = $165.125. 
The trader sold this cargo at $169 so he makes $3.875 per 
metric tonne. Had he sold the cargo on a back to back basis at the 
mean of means plus $1.75 he would only have made 50 cents per 
metric tonne. However, by selling this back to back he would have 
locked in his profit, regardless of what the market, and therefore 
the Platt�s prices, did. 
Alternatively, the trader might have chosen to sell the cargo on 
an EFP basis against the August futures, say August plus 26 cents. 
The contract might have entitled the buyer to trigger the EFP any 
time before loading, and the buyer might choose to trigger it, say, 
at a level of $170. 
Thus the trader would receive $170 plus 25 cents = $170.25 at 
a cost to him of $165.125, a profit on this leg of the transaction of 
$5.125. 
However, the trader would be long approximately 260 lots of 
August IPE gasoil at $170. He could sell these immediately and lock 
in his total profit, or he could hold on to them in the hope that the 
market would rise further and he could make more money. By 
doing so he would also run the risk that the market might move 
down which could mean that he would end up giving back some of 
the profit made on the physical transaction. He might also prefer to 
sell his position in small lots, or he might have taken an opposing 
position when the deal was originally agreed, and therefore used 
these lots to set against his existing short position. All in all, he has 
a fully tradable position with which he could try to make more 
money. 
Russian fuel oil 
Russian fuel oil is generally sold at a price related to published 
prices. The formula often used is the mean of the means of the 3.5 
per cent sulphur fuel oil quotation as published by Plwtt�s on the 
bill of lading date, the day before the b/l date and the day after, for 
cif cargoes NWE and FOB barges Rotterdam plus the mean of the 
3.4lpage 2 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 139/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
high and low quote for the E4 (Russian fuel oil) premium as quoted 
by PZatt’s plus a negotiated premium, for example $1. 
During a short period in 1990/1991 the Russian formula for E4 
used the mean of the premium as quoted by Platt’s and by Argus. 
Although this generally no longer applies now, it has been used 
below as an example of how a variety of publications can be used in 
a pricing formulae. 
IYatt’s "tt ’s I’latt’s Agus 
cif NWE fob Rott cif NWE cif NWE 
cargoes barges E4 E4 
b/l minus 1dayM 62 -64 
63 -65 66 -67 
67 -68 18 -19 
18 -19 17.5 -18.5 
18 -19 
b/l plus 1 day 64 -66 68 -70 19 -20 18.5 -19.5 
mean 64 67.67 18.83 18.5 
mean of means 65.84 18.665 
Therefore the cargo of E4 Russian fuel oil will cost $65.84 plus 
$18.665 = $84.505 per metric tonne. (All figures have been rounded 
to the nearest 2 decimal points. In real life this would usually be 
calculated exactly or specified in the contract. j 
3.4.2 Unleaded gasoline 
Unleaded regular or premium gasoline usually moves across the 
Atlantic from Europe to the US East Coast, or occasionally vice 
versa, depending on which direction the arbitrage works (see Fig. 
3.4). The market for gasoline in the US is priced in cents per gallon, 
whereas gasoline in Europe is priced in dollars per metric tonne. 
When US grade gasoline is being discussed fob Europe, it is 
usually based on a differential to the New York futures price for 
regular unleaded gasoline. Since December 1994, the futures 
contract has been based on regular reformulated gasoline (RFG), 
but European exports are still mainly conventional grades. There is 
no futures market for premium gasoline in the US. The differential 
to the futures gasoline should include the cost of moving the oil into 
the US East coast, and a deduction must be made for the US 
customs duty (the New York futures price includes duty). 
Although discussion on unleaded gasoline prices will be based 
on a differential to the futures market, the cargo will often be sold 
at a fixed price which will correspond to the futures price less the 
discount agreed at the time the deal is concluded. 
For example, a seller may have 25,000 metric tonnes of regular 
unleaded gasoline fob Antwerp available in ten days' time. He has 
been asking for the futures price for the prompt plus 1 month, (i.e. 
if the current prompt month is July, then the futures price in 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 3.4fpage 3

--- Page 140/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
-Ne~vYorkHarborcaraoes 
...... Nmexfutures 
16 
14 
6 12 - -
m -g 10-L 
88 
6 
4 
2 
I I1 , 
Jan-95 Jun-95 Dec-95 Jun-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Dec-97 
Source: PetroleumArgus, Nymex 
Figure 3.4 Unleaded gasoline, New York minus Rotterdam 
question will be that for the month of August) less 4.5 cents. The 
buyer is only prepared to pay August less 5 cents. The two parties 
agree on August less 4.7 cents. The absolute price is calculated at 
the time the deal is finally agreed, when both parties agree that the 
August print at the time is 54.75, therefore the fixed price is 54.75 
less 4.7 cents = 50.05 cents per gallon. Thus although all the 
discussions throughout the negotiations have been at a differential 
to the constantly changing futures screen, the price paid for the 
cargo is a fixed price. 
3.4.3 Syrian crude oil 
Souedie is a heavy crude (low AF’I), produced by the Syrians, which 
is predominantly used for bitumen production. It is not an easy 
crude to trade, but is generally sold at a differential to Brent, even 
though its quality with respect to sulphur and gravity is vastly 
inferior. It is important to specify which Brent quotation will be 
used: forward Brent as quoted in the 15-day cargo market, or dated 
Brent, which represents the price one would have to pay to buy a 
cargo of Brent with fixed loading dates. 
An example formula might be the mean of the dated Brent 
quotation as published by Platt�s on the bill of lading date, the day 
before the bill of lading date and the day after, less $4/barrel. The 
bill of lading date falls on 5 July which is mid week. The Platt�s 
prices for Brent on the relevant dates are as follows: 
3.4lpage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 141/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
Date dated Brcnt 15-day Brcnt 16-day Brcnt 
July August 
4th ,July 17.80-18.00 18.00-18.20 17.75-17.95 
5th July 17.90-18.05 18.10-18.30 17.85-18.00 
6th ,July 17.90-18.05 18.10-18.25 17.85-18.00 
mean of' means 17.95 18.158 17.9 
Thus the price of the cargo of crude at dated Brent minus $4/barrel 
would be $17.95 less $4 = $13.95/barrel. Had the formula been 
based on &day Brent for July, then the price would be $18.158 
less $4 = $14.158/barrel. (N.B. Arrangements should be specified in 
the contract if any of the dates should fall on a day when Plattk is 
not published.) 
Alternatively, the contract could be priced at a differential to 
the Brent futures market as traded on the London based 
International Petroleum Exchange (IPE). The buyer could then 
have the option to trigger the futures price to be used in calculating 
the final price, any given time when the futures market is open. 
Some contracts may allow for the price to be an average over a 
short period of time, say 10 minutes, to allow the other party to 
take some futures positions in order to hedge their risk. 
3.4.4 Price swap 
An inland heating oil distributor may be buying his supplies of 
gasoil from a major, who has a conveniently located refinery, at a 
formula price of the average of PEatt’s over the month for cargoes of 
gasoil 0.2 per cent sulphur cif NWE plus $4. So far he has been 
passing on any price fluctuations to his customers on a monthly 
basis, but the distributor's customers, not very happy with the 
fluctuating prices which create chaos for their budgeting, are very 
keen to purchase from him at a fixed price for a one year term. The 
distributor is not familiar with the workings of the futures and 
options markets, and simply does not have the time or the 
inclination to play these markets on a day to day basis. This level of 
commitment would be necessary if he made attempts to transfer the 
risk of buying floating and selling fixed onto the futures and 
options markets. 
The current market price for heating oil is $172 per metric 
tonne. A trader agrees with the distributor to fix the price of the 
gasoil from the major at $172 per metric tonne, and buy back the 
floating price over a period of 12 months. (All figures are arbitrary.) 
After the first month, the Platt’s average for the month is $170 
and so the major invoices the distributor for the oil lifted that 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.4tpage 5

--- Page 142/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
month under contract at $174 per metric tonne. The trader 
therefore reimburses the distributor the difference between the 
invoice price and the agreed fixed price, $174 and $172 
respectively, that is $2 per metric tonne. Thus the oil effectively 
only costs the distributor $172 per metric tonne. 
The following month the market falls, and the average PZakt’s 
price falls to $165. The major invoices at $169, which is $3 below 
the agreed fixed price and therefore the distributor must pay back 
to the trader $3 per metric tonne. Therefore the oil is still costing 
him $172 per metric tonne. 
Due to severe weather conditions in Europe and the USA, and 
some unexpected refinery closures, the price of gasoil rockets and 
the Platt’s average for the next month comes to $187. The major 
invoices the distributor for the gasoil at $191 but the trader 
reimburses the distributor $19 per metric tonne to bring the cost of 
the oil to the distributor down to $172 per metric tonne. 
Further examples of price swaps are discussed below in 
Chapters 10 and 11. 
3.4lpage 6 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 143/964 ---
3.5 Sources of price information 
Price information on crude oil and products can be obtained from a 
variety of sources, either by talking directly to participants in the 
market, or by using pricing information services. 
Oil and energy pricing information services are not new. One 
might think that the supply and use of services such as Reuters, 
Bridge Telerate, Platt’s and others are manifestations of modern 
technology. However, whilst this technology has dramatically 
altered the means by which the information is supplied, the basic 
concept of gathering pricing information is very old indeed. In 
ancient Rome, a public service existed to determine the price of 
such commodities as corn and timber. 
Today's market is considerably more global than it was in the 
days of ancient Rome. Thirty years ago the idea that a reformer 
unit having problems in the US Gulf could affect product prices in 
Singapore seemed absurd. Each market, Europe, the USA and the 
Far East, existed in its own cocoon, self contained from the outside 
world. Producers, refiners and consumers traded with each other in 
their own markets without recourse to others outside their area of 
trading. 
The increasing sophistication of trading companies, the 
adoption of financial trading tools and techniques, and the greater 
awareness of the oil market to arbitrage opportunities has changed 
all this. Now the success or otherwise of the Russian grain harvest 
can have an effect on product prices in NWE and the 
Meditei*i.anean within a few hours. Therefore, anyone concerned 
with the value of oil must keep themselves fully up to date on a 
whole variety of information as regularly as possible. But even 
more important, they must learn to interpret the information 
available and reach an informed opinion. 
A major contributing factor to this global outlook has been the 
explosion of information technology. Whilst information has always 
been sought, in times of extreme political instability as was seen at 
the end of 1990, and the first half of 1991, fast, reliable information 
becomes even more vital. 
Much of what happened to oil prices over this period had little 
to do with supply and demand factors. It depended far more on 
what politicians were saying -or not saying -for example, what 
people were thinking might happen in the Middle East and the 
White House. With the screens as widely available as they are now, 
these events could be closely followed as they occurred. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.5fpage 1

--- Page 144/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
There are times, however, when the screens can disseminate 
news too quickly without due consideration of the facts. In 1983 for 
example, an Opec meeting was taking place in London. It still holds 
the record for being the longest such meeting. For ten days or so, 
the comings and goings of each oil minister was watched and 
examined in great detail, in an attempt to interpret how the 
meeting was going. Their faces were scrutinised each time they left 
the meeting room for clues as to how the meeting was progressing 
and the likelihood of an agreement to halt the slide in oil prices. 
During the previous week, the price of a barrel of Brent crude oil 
had tumbled $10. 
At one stage the screen services reported that a particular 
minister had left the meeting in a great hurry and rushed down the 
corridor with no word for the hovering journalists. The market 
immediately interpreted this as a serious rift between members 
with the talks on the verge of collapse. As a result the price of oil 
dropped sharply. 
Later in the day it transpired that the poor man had merely 
eaten an unsatisfactory oyster the previous evening, and had left in 
a hurry for biological reasons! The news was too late to prevent the 
price slide, which obviously had been based on the flimsiest of 
reasons. 
Pricing services have been unpopular in many circles since 
their inception, and are likely to remain so amongst those traders 
who prefer the market to be less transparent. However, pricing 
services are here to stay, in one form or other. Indeed, new services 
appear regularly, perhaps focusing on one specialised area of the 
market. One reason for their unpopularity is their vulnerability to 
abuse, but the ability to minimise this is very much in the hands of 
the users of these services. While contract pricing continues to be 
dominated by just one service, the scope for traders to manipulate 
the prices in their favour is great. A spread of quoted prices and 
some more imaginative pricing mechanisms would make this 
'abuse' more difficult. 
3.5.1 Mechanisms of price gathering 
There are two basic ways in which one can obtain pricing 
information, neither of which are mutually exclusive. Prices can be 
obtained by speaking to the market, talking to fellow traders who 
might be buying and selling oil, and gauging at what price they 
would buy or sell. Oil brokers are also sources of pricing 
information, since it is their job to be as up to date as possible with 
who is in the market to do business at any one time, and at what 
price. This applies to physical oil transactions, forward business, 
3.5Ipage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 145/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
swaps and over the counter transactions. Futures brokers should 
also be able to supply information about futures and options 
markets in terms of the level of interest amongst potential players, 
whether there are many players or whether it is quiet, and provide 
technical price analysis. Prices on the futures markets are quoted 
second by second via live feed from the exchanges to the screen 
services which then sell this information to their subscribers. 
There are a number of problems attached to relying solely on 
these sources and methods. Firstly, ringing round to glean market 
information is very time consuming and relies on speaking to a 
large number of people in order to get a representative picture of 
the oil trading market. To be sure that deal information you may 
obtain is correct, both sides of a deal should be verified, and a cross 
section of the participants in the market place, majors, traders, 
refiners, brokers etc., should be spoken to. As an individual 
working for a trading company, and therefore a potential 
competitor of the people you need to speak to, the information they 
give you may not be entirely unbiased. 
In addition, you could come up against the law if your 
conversations could be construed as discussing pricing policies that 
could contravene either the Treaty of Rome in Europe or the 
Robinson-Patman Act in the USA (see Chapter 17). Both these laws 
deal with anti-trust matters. This is a major problem for producers, 
although the law does not yet appear to apply to consumer cartels. 
Brokers might not continue to be fully co-operative if a trader 
persists in taking information from them, but not giving them any 
business. A trader might therefore feel obliged to transact a deal 
through a broker, and pay his commission, if he is to continue 
taking information from the broker. 
Information on the screen about the futures markets trading 
levels, is an accurate price indication for that commodity under the 
terms it is traded on the futures exchange, but will only provide a 
benchmark for other types of oil or even the same quality traded on 
the physical market. For example, the IPE gasoil contract allows 
for delivery in ARA. However, barges of gasoil, also often delivered 
in ARA, may trade at a differential to the screen at certain times. 
Prices on the futures markets may give little or no indication of the 
supply/demand balance effect on a particular quality of physical oil 
even if it is similar quality to that traded on the exchange. 
With these problems to contend with, it is not surprising that 
most trading organisations subscribe to one or more pricing service. 
These publications provide a useful reference point, but it must 
always be remembered that their prices are generally out of date by 
the time they are received since they may not be published until 
19:OO hours or later local time on the day to which the prices refer. 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 3.5fpage 3

--- Page 146/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Published prices therefore have a limited value for fixing prices 
throughout the day. A price report may, nevertheless, be useful for 
broad assumptions. For example, the service may report dated 
Brent at a 10 centharrel discount to front month IPE futures, and 
Ekofisk yesterday traded at a 40 cent premium to dated Brent. If 
the screen shows front month futures Brent up 20 cents and 
brokers or other market sources inform you dated Brent has 
maintained its differential to the screen, you may assume that 
Ekofisk also has gained 20 cents. 
These published prices, generally a range which represents, for 
example, a buyhell range, will have been obtained in the same way 
that theoretically any trader could. The reporters for the pricing 
organisation will have spoken to a range of contacts in the 
appropriate market, and, using their expertise and knowledge, will 
arrive at an educated assessment of where they consider the 
market to be. 
Thus the published price is not sacrosanct. It does not always 
mean that a buyer could necessarily purchase a specific quantity 
and quality of oil at that price. Nor does it necessarily mean that oil 
of that quality was traded at that price on that day. This is a very 
important distinction between prices quoted by Platt�s, Argus or 
London Oil Reports, and those which flash up on real time screens 
such as Reuters and Bridge Telerate for futures prices. A last 
traded price quoted for Brent on the International Petroleum 
Exchange futures market in London will mean exactly that -a deal 
has been done at that price. The deal may however only be for one 
lot, of 1,000 barrels, which compared to a cargo of 500,000 barrels is 
small. The transaction may also have been concluded by a trader 
for manipulative reasons, exactly because it is a relatively cheap 
way of influencing prices in your favour if you are about to buy or 
sell 500 times as many barrels of oil. 
In order to use price reports correctly, any user should 
understand how those prices are arrived at. All price reporting 
companies employ reporters and editors who spend their working 
days mainly talking to the market over the phone. Their aim is to 
establish what is happening in the market, and perhaps why, what 
deals have been concluded and what the sentiment of the market is. 
With this information in hand, they can make an assessment of 
market prices for crude and products at a particular time in the 
day. 
To be of maximum use, information must be as accurate and as 
unbiased as possible. Immediately one must consider why traders 
would give what could be considered as confidential and 
commercially valuable information. Any company which closely 
guards its pricing policies, supply/demand positions, likely future 
3.5fpage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 147/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
requirements and current spot and term deals, must have a very 
good reason for divulging this information to a third party. They 
will know that a price reporter has to speak to many participants in 
the oil market. How can they be sure that the information given to 
the reporter does not find its way back to a competitor. 
In order to persuade traders to divulge this information, 
certain guidelines have to be followed. Perhaps the most important 
is that information given in confidence remains confidential. 
Details of confidential deals may be passed on to a price reporter 
once a good relationship has been built up. Whilst the details of 
these deals cannot be published, the reporter can use the 
information when setting prices, but will only continue to receive 
the confidential information if it is not passed on to the market. 
Secondly, there should be an exchange of information between 
the reporter and contacts. Due to space constraints, not all the 
information that a price reporter collects can be published. By 
speaking to the reporters directly, traders may get that little extra 
piece of information in the course of conversation which may help 
him to assess his position in the market. The trader can also use 
the reporter to check out rumours and ask specific questions which 
he himself may have difficulty in posing, for fear of revealing his 
position in the market. 
3.5.2 Use of price reports 
If one is to use price reports, and it is inevitable that any trader will 
have to do so at some time, it is vital that the user appreciates the 
methodology used by the pricing service to understand what the 
data represents. The methodology used by each pricing service is 
slightly different. Without this knowledge, confusion can arise 
which can lead to expensive mistakes. 
Platt’s, Argus and Reuters all quote 3 per cent sulphur fuel oil 
in NWE, but what does this figure represent? Is it bunker spec. or 
the specification used by the power generation sector? Does NWE 
mean UK or Rotterdam? If the reporter hears a deal done cif UK do 
they net it back to Rotterdam in order to equate it with their 
published prices? If a deal were done at 6.00pm London time, would 
the published price of that day reflect this deal? If the cargo traded 
was actually 2.7 per cent sulphur, how would that price be reflected 
in the published price of the day? 
All price reporting services should have answers readily 
available to all these questions, and any user should ask for the 
company's pricing methodology manual. This gives details of how 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.5tpage 5

--- Page 148/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
pricing services arrive at their prices, qualities of oil, locations, cut- 
off time, etc. 
Consider the price of Brent. Platt’s, LOR and Argus all quote 
Brent prices, but other differences apart, at what time do these 
services make their final assessment? Is it at close of business in 
London, New York, Houston or Tokyo? Prices can move 
significantly between, for example, 4:OOp.m. New York and 
6:OOp.m. in Houston. Differences between the various assessments 
may simply reflect different markets rather than conflicting 
evaluations. 
Perhaps more potentially confusing are the different roll over 
dates for crude oil, that is the change from one trading period to 
another. i.e. March barrels to April. 
For their Dubai crude oil quotation, some publications will roll 
over on the last day of the calendar month. However, WTI futures 
rolls over on the third business day prior to the 25th of the month. 
Therefore, if you were making a comparison between Dubai crude 
and WTI you would be in danger of comparing different delivery 
months at the end of each month, which is very likely to distort the 
spread. 
Another way in which data can be misleading is the highflow 
price quoted. Some pricing publications explain this as a buyhell 
range. Others use the range to indicate the price of different 
qualities, e.g. naphtha quotes may reflect the buy/sell range of open 
specification naphtha, that is the quality traded in forwarapaper 
deals. However, other pricing publications may define their 
naphtha high/low range as the price of the open specification 
naphtha for one quote, and prompt physical naphtha for the other. 
These anomalies can be resolved by fully understanding what 
each price means. Analysis based on the incorrect interpretation of 
data could lead to the wrong conclusions, which in turn could mean 
commercial decisions may be taken on incorrect data. 
3.5.3 Pitfalls 
In an ideal situation all price quotations would be an accurate 
reflection of market values of a particular crude or product of a 
particular specification, at a specific location, of a specific size at a 
specific time. Discounts and premia to these prices should thus only 
reflect changes to these specifications. Unfortunately, life is not 
that simple. 
Whilst some crudes and products are regularly traded, many 
are not. In these cases, price reporters have to price this oil at a 
differential to more regularly traded oil, and move the prices up or 
down in line. When a deal is reported for the rarely traded oil, the 
3.5/page 6 Supplement 1 Mar 1996

--- Page 149/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
reporter hopes that his quoted price is not too out of line. For a 
number of reasons, this may not be the case. Then a reporter is 
faced with the decision of moving the quoted price by an 
abnormally large amount on one day, or moving it more gradually 
over a period of days to bring it back into line. 
This is just one of many judgements which have to be made 
every trading day by price reporters. It is vital, therefore, that 
reporters have the necessary experience and qualifications to make 
these judgements. If this is not the case it can leave the reporter 
open to manipulation by traders who might choose to influence the 
published price in their favour. 
A deal concluded on gasoline, the quality of which may not 
meet that of the quoted quality, may be given to the price reporter 
without specifying that the oil was off spec. The price achieved for 
the cargo is likely to be below market price and therefore the price 
reporter might mark the quoted price down accordingly, whereas, 
allowing for the difference in quality, the price perhaps should have 
stayed the same. An experienced price reporter would be wary of 
this type of game, and would check all the details of any deal 
reported, preferably with both parties involved. Experience would 
make them particularly wary of selective reporting of deals from 
traders not usually known for their co-operation. 
3.5.4 Publications 
The number of price reporting and price analysis services has 
grown rapidly since the 1980s, each fulfilling a different need. They 
can however, be grouped into various types of services as follows. 
Newsletters were the first source of price information 
generally available. Although most are produced only on a weekly 
basis, their value lies in their depth of information, price analysis 
and considered comment upon developments with longer term 
implications for the oil markets. 
As spot trading markets grew and traders demanded more 
than weekly price reports, daily telex and fax services emerged. 
These services can be delivered in hard copy, or by using on-line 
electronic services. As the technology developed so electronic data 
services became popular amongst those users needing data on an 
immediate basis, such as those using the futures and options 
markets. Additional software enables the customer to manipulate 
the data, and to produce graphic representations at the press of a 
few buttons. Many of these services are now also available through 
the internet. 
The final group of price services are those where the customer 
can not only manipulate the data, but actually inputs some of the 
Supplement 1 Mar 1996 3.5fpage 7

--- Page 150/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
data. As an extension of this a number of attempts have been made 
to develop trading via computer networks, but these have not yet 
been successful, and now co-operative price reporting is 
concentrated on information distribution. The most successful of 
these is APPI (Asian Petroleum Price Index) which reports oil 
prices traded on the Asian markets. However, this service revealed 
its limitations during the 1990 Gulf crisis, when its weekly price 
reports were rapidly rendered out of date as the market remained 
volatile. APPI crude price assessments are now made twice-weekly. 
The list below gives some examples of each of these groups of 
services. It is not exhaustive, and is being frequently added to. 
It is therefore important to differentiate between services 
which offer analytical information, and those involved in price 
reporting. Many of the former subscribe to the latter in order to 
obtain the data which they then analyse. 
For example, one may look at the Reuters screen for futures 
quotations, but at PEatt�s or Argus for cash quotations. Newsletters 
may supply background information and analysis of the impact of 
political events on the oil market. A time-sharing system, which 
can feed into your own in-house computer network, would mean 
that you could manipulate data, perhaps following your own pricing 
formula, or your profit & loss account against the current market 
values. 
Newsletters 
-delivered by fax, mail or via the internet 
Arab Oil and Gas: reports on oil and gas trends in Arab and 
African nations: produced fortnightly 
Energy Compass: various produced weekly and daily 
FT Energy Economist: monthly 
Middle East Economic Survey (MEES): weekly 
Oil Buyers Guide: weekly and daily 
Platt�s Oilgram News: daily 
Platt�s Week: weekly 
Argus Global Markets (AGM): weekly 
Petroleum Intelligence Weekly (PIW): weekly 
Daily oil price reports 
-delivered by fax, telex or electronic means 
AFM Oil Market Report (Germany) 
Bloom berg 
Bridge Telerate 
London Oil Reports (LOR) 
3.5lpage 8 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 151/964 ---
3 Oil pricing arrangements 
Platt’s Oilgrarri Price Report 
Oil Price Irifortriatioti Services (OPIS) 
Petroleum Argus 
Reuters RIM Intelligence 
(Asia-Pacific) 
The Bumker News Daily -Bunker prices 
Online oil price and information services 
Dial UD svstems 
-via a modem either directly or through the internet 
Intertiational Petroleum Exchange -closing prices only 
New York Mercantile Exchange -delayed prices and closing prices 
Reuters Data Services (Formerly IP Sharp) 
Saladiti Information Service (SIS) -uses third party price data 
PDS On-Line Seroices -US & Canadian crude oil postings 
Real time svstems 
-the connection is permanent via telephone lines or satellite. 
Bloomberg Energy 
Bridge Telerate (formerly Knight Ridder & Dow Joizes) 
Platt’s Global Alert 
Reuters Energy 2000 
Saladin Information Service (SISj -uses third party price data 
Cooperative pricing services 
APPI -Asian Petroleum Price Index 
FEOP Index- Far East Oil Price Index 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 3.5ipage 9

--- Page 152/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 153/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Petroleum Argus 
4.1 Introduction 
4.2 North Sea 
4.2.1 North Sea crude market 
4.2.2 United Kingdom 
4.2.3 Norway 
4.2.4 Denmark 
4.3 Mediterranean 
4.3.1Russia 
4.3.2 Algeria 
4.3.3 Libya 
4.3.4 Egypt 
4.3.5 Syria 
4.3.6 Iran 
4.3.7 Tunisia 
4.3.8 Iraq 
4.4 West Africa 
4.4.1 Nigeria 
4.4.2 Angola 
4.4.3 Gabon 
4.4.4 Congo 
4.4.5 Cameroon 
4.4.6 Zaire 
4.4.7 Equatorid Guinea 
4.4.8 Ivory Coast 
4.5 United States 
4.5.1 US crude market 
4.5.2 East coast 
4.5.3 Gulf coast 
4.5.4 Mid-continent 
4.5.5 West coast 
Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 154/964 ---
4.6 Middle East 
4.6.1 Saudi Arabia 
4.6.2 Iran 
4.6.3 Iraq 
4.6.4 Kuwait 
4.6.5 Oman 
4.6.6 Qatar 
4.6.7 United Arab Emirates 
4.6.8 Yemen 
4.7 Asia Pacific 
4.7.1 Indonesia 
4.7.2 Malaysia 
4.7.3 Australia 
4.7.4 China 
4.7.5 Papua New Guinea 
4.7.6 Vietnam 
4.8 Latin America 
4.8.1 Argentina 
4.8.2 Brazil 
4.8.3 Colombia 
4.8.4 Ecuador 
4.8.5 Mexico 
4.8.6 Peru 
4.8.7 Trinidad and Tobago 
4.8.8 Venezuela 
Appendix 
4.1 OITicial crude prices 
4.2 Formula crude prices 
4.3 Spot crude prices 
4.4 Further reading 
Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 155/964 ---
4.1 Introduction 
The physical crude market is the foundation of the oil market. 
There are more than a hundred grades of crude oil that could be 
traded being produced in over fifty countries around the world. In 
1995, 28 million b/d of crude oil crossed international borders and 
nearly as much again was traded internally within the countries in 
which it was produced. As every grade and location represents a 
different price and the relative values of crudes are continually 
changing over time in response to shifts in supply and demand on 
both a local and an international scale: the crude oil market not 
only provides essential price information: but also endless trading 
opportunities for companies involved in the oil business. 
The variation in the relative prices of crude oils is both 
remarkable and unpredictable. Over the past few years the price 
differential between light and heavy crudes has swung between the 
two extremes (see Fig. 4.1). Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 
the summer of 1990, the price differential widened abruptly as 
Saudi Arabia and other producers increased the supply of heavy 
crudes to make up for the loss of supply from Iraq and Kuwait. But 
the differential has gradually narrowed since then as rising 
production from the North Sea and elsewhere gave lighter crudes 
an increasing share of production. By 1994, the price differentials 
1.00 . . . ._. --.-.*-,*-->> 
0.00 
-1.oo 
--2.00 a,5 9 --3.00 
-4.00 -Dubai 
-Urals cif Med 
.. . . . . . Bonny Light -5.00 -6.00 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan 95 Jan96 Jan97 
ource: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.1 Spot price differentials against dated Brent 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.lfpage 1

--- Page 156/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
between dated Brent and other crudes had reached their lowest 
level for many years, confounding earlier forecasts of a gradual 
widening of crude price differentials during the 1990s. But the 
price differential between light and heavy crudes widened abruptly 
again in early 1996 as a number of new North Sea fields were 
delayed and oil demand surged because of the cold winter weather, 
creating a temporary shortage in the Atlantic basin. Sour crude 
differentials continued to widen in 1997 following the resumption of 
limited Iraqi oil exports under the terms of the UN oil-for-aid deal, 
but price differentials between eastern and western markets 
narrowed as strong demand from Asia-Pacific refiners pulled 
increasing volumes of west African crude out of the Atlantic basin. 
4.l/page 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 157/964 ---
4.2 North Sea 
The importance of the North Sea to the world oil market far 
outweighs its contribution to world oil supply. For over a decade, 
the North Sea crude oil market has been the preferred benchmark 
for the majority of internationally traded crudes. Although Nymex 
WTI is the most visible of the price markers used by the oil 
industry, more than 60 per cent of the physical crude market (about 
20 million b/d) is actually priced against Brent, which is a North 
Sea crude. Because it is used in pricing formulas for crudes in the 
Atlantic Basin, the Mid-east Gulf, and now the Far East, Brent's 
influence extends far beyond the narrow confines of the North Sea. 
As a result, the North Sea market is closely watched by everyone 
involved in trading oil. 
The North Sea provides more than 9 per cent of the world's 
crude oil production, with the bulk of the output corning from two 
countries, the UK and Norway, and minor amounts being 
contributed by Denmark and the Netherlands (see Table 4.1). 
Production has risen sharply in recent years as a succession of new 
fields were brought on stream. In 199'7, North Sea crude production 
is expected to average 6.5 million b/d, a further increase over 1995 
when production averaged 5.8 million b/d. By the end of 1997, 
North Sea production could reach 7 million b/d and further growth 
is expected up to the end of the decade. Output from the UK 
offshore sector is now growing more slowly, but Norway continues 
to make rapid gains and remains the largest crude oil producer in 
the North Sea in 1997. The UK also produces 100,000 b/d of crude 
onshore, mainly from the Wytch Farm field operated by BP. 
Table 4.1 North Sea crude production and exports, 1996 
country Production Exports Capacity? 
b/d bid bfd 
UK" 2,418,000 1,700,000 2,800,000 
Norway 3,107,000 2,700,000 3,300,000 
Denmark 210,000 115,000 230,000 
Netherlands 39.000 17.000 40.000 
Source: Petroleum Argus *exclrrding onshore f end year 
Oil is produced in the North Sea from about 150 fields and the 
output fi-om the individual fields varies greatly in quality, with 
gravity ranging from 23" API to 50" API and sulphur content from 
virtually nil to 1.9 per cent. However, this variation is greatly 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2fpage 1

--- Page 158/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
reduced by blending. North Sea crudes are generally not available 
as output from individual fields. The economics of producing in the 
North Sea often require companies to share a common 
infrastructure so that crude from a number of fields becomes 
blended in pipelines, while other fields are developed as satellites of 
their larger neighbours with the oil produced being blended in 
storage tanks prior to offshore loading -although this is now 
changing as more floating production, storage and off-loading vessel 
(FPSO) systems are brought into operation. 
Until recently, almost all the North Sea crude production 
streams were combined to form one of ten major export blends of 
more than 100,000 b/d -Forties, Statfjord, Brent, Oseberg, 
Gullfaks, Ekofisk, Flotta, DUC, Fulmar and Beryl -but the 
picture has changed since 1995 as new offshore loading fields came 
on stream in the UK and Norway, greatly increasing the variety of 
crudes available (see Table 4.2). 
Table 4.2 North Sea crudes an,d loading termin,als, 1996 
Crude stream Terminal Location 
Brent Hlend Sullom Voe Shet,land Islands, UK 
Ekofisk Tees River England, UK 
Flotta Blend Scapa Flow Orkney Islands, UK 
Forties Blend Hound Point Scotland, UK 
Oseberg Sture Norway 
Denmark (DUO Kaegdrd Denmark 
Alba Alba Field Offshore 
Beryl Beryl Field Offshore 
Blenheim Blenheim Field Offshore 
Drnugen Draugen Field Offshore 
DouglasiLennox Douglas Field Offshore 
Fife Fife Field Offshore 
Fulmar Fulmar Field Offshore 
Fray Fray Field Offshore 
Gryphon Gryphon Field Offshore 
Gullfaks Gullfaks Field Offshore or Mongstad 
Gullfaks C Gullfaks Field Offshore or Mongstad 
Harding" Scapa Flow Orkney Islands, UK 
Heidrun Heidrun Field Offshore or Mongstad 
Maureen Maureen Field Offshore 
Sleipner Sleipner Field Offshore 
Statfjord Statfjord Field Offshore 
Troll Troll Field Offshore or Mongstad 
Yme Yme Field Offshore or Mongstad 
* transported to Flotta terminal by shuttle tanker. 
4.2Ipage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 159/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Although the ten blends still accounted for over 80 per cent of 
the total output fi-om the North Sea in 1996, there are now more 
than twenty-five different types of crude that can be traded. And 
the number will increase further in 1997 as new fields in the North 
Sea and other areas such as Liverpool Bay and west of Shetland 
start producing. New offshore loading fields in the North Sea 
include Captain, MacCulloch, Durw-aid and Dauntless, Curlew, and 
Mallard in the UK sector: and Balder, Njord and Norne in the 
Norwegian sector. The Liverpool Bay fields, Douglas & Lennox are 
loaded offshore as a combined stream; while west of Shetland 
Foinaven (like Harding) will be transported to the Flotta terminal 
by shuttle tanker. 
4.2.1 North Sea crude market 
The North Sea market has many different dimensions since it 
involves a complex mixture of physical, forward, futures and swaps 
contracts (see Chapter I). The most important market is for Brent 
crude, which is traded in several different forms: 
as a physical commodit.y, dated Brent, 
as a forward paper cont.ract, 15-day Brent, 
as a futures contract, IPE Brent, and 
as a swaps cont.ract, Brent. CFDs. 
17.50 -- Dated -- 15day (Oct %) . - - -IPE (Oct 94) 
15.00 ~ 
01 Sep 08 Sep 15 Sep 22 Sep 29 Sep 06 Oct 13 Oct 20 Oct 26 Oct 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE 
Figure 4.2 Dated, 15-day a.nd IPE Brent prices, October 1994 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2fpage 3 I

--- Page 160/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The physical market trades cargoes of Brent Blend that have 
loading dates attached to them, hence the term "dated". The loading 
programme for Brent Blend, which assigns dates to individual 
cargoes; is released by the terminal operator in the middle of the 
month preceding delivery. This means that the earliest point at 
which a cargo can become "dated" is fifteen days before the start of 
the delivery month. As a result, the paper market for Brent Blend 
requires sellers to give a minimum of fifteen days' notice of their 
intention to nominate a specific physical cargo against a forward 
sale, which is why it is known as the "15-day" market (see Chapter 7). 
Brent Blend is also actively traded as a futures contract on the 
London International Petroleum Exchange (IPE j for periods 
starting from one month ahead of delivery, but the contract is 
settled against a price index based on market reports of deals done 
in the 15-day market (see Chapter 8). And there is also a rapidly 
expanding short-term swaps or "contract for differences" (CFD) 
market, which is based on the price differential between the weekly 
average of Platt’s assessments for dated Brent up to six weeks 
ahead (see Chapter 7). Dated Brent assessments are usually taken 
to apply to a period of two to three weeks ahead, and companies 
often need to be able to establish prices for periods that lie in the 
time frame between the "spot" and forward or futures markets. 
But it is the composition and structure of the underlying 
physical market that accounts for much of its importance. First of 
all, the North Sea is a highly liquid market. This is because the 
upstream tax regulations in the UK give integrated companies 
producing oil an incentive to trade at arms' length in order to 
establish an independent and market-related price for tax purposes 
(see Chapter 15). For this reason, major integrated oil companies 
such as BP and Shell have always sold a large part of their 
production to third-parties in order to ensure that they are taxed at 
prevailing market prices rather than a reference price determined 
by the Oil Taxation Office (OTO). As a result, there is always a 
large amount of physical oil available to the market guaranteeing 
its liquidity. 
Secondly, the North Sea is the only effective market for prompt 
crude available to companies trading oil. Nymex WTI ceases 
trading more than a month ahead of delivery because of the 
operational constraints imposed by the pipeline scheduling system 
in the US (see Section 4.5). And long-haul crudes from the Mid-east 
Gulf are loaded too far ahead to provide an alternative -even if 
spot trading were to be encouraged by the producers (see Sect,ion 
4.6). But North Sea crudes are produced much closer to the market 
and can still be traded by European refiners up to a few days before 
they are delivered (see Fig. 4.2). As a result, the North Sea market 
4.2/page 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 161/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Denmark 
Other Nonvay. 
UK Offshare" 
Flnna 
* Gullfaks, Gullfaks 6, Draugen,Sleipner, "Beryl Mureen Gryphon Fulmar 
Troll, Froy. Heidrun & Yrne Alba & Hading 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Pig.ure 4.3 Coxposition, of dated North Sea market, 1996’ 
fills an essential gap in the term structure of the world oil market 
by providing a price reference for crude oil over a period of one to 
two months ahead. It is for this reason that dated Brent is used so 
widely in pricing formulas, rather than Nymex WTI or even IPE 
Brent which both expire too far ahead for the physical oil market 
(see Chapter 8). 
Thirdly, the North Sea market operates as a physical arbitrage 
mechanism linking the various parts of the world oil market. 
Because North Sea crudes are generally light and sweet, they are 
attractive to any refiner if the price is right. The most important 
arbitrage opportunity operates across the Atlantic and the US 
imports, on average, between a third and a half of the North Sea's 
output. But North Sea crudes also move regularly to the 
Mediterranean, and, occasionally, to the Far East, thus ensuring 
that crude oil prices do not get too far out of line for too long in any 
region. 
The importance of the physical oil market in the North Sea has 
encouraged the development of active and liquid paper markets, in 
particular the 15-day forward Brent market (see Chapter 7) and the 
IPE Brent futures contract (see Chapter 8), both of which play a 
major role in the oil market as a whole. The choice of Brent, rather 
than one of the other major North Sea production streams, reflects 
the much wider distribution of ownership between companies 
which prevents any one producer from squeezing the market. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2fpage 5

--- Page 162/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Production of Brent Blend, however, has fallen over the past few 
years raising concerns about its future reliability as a price marker. 
Nevertheless, dated Brent was the most actively traded grade 
in the physical North Sea market last year, representing nearly 30 
per cent of the dated deals reported by Petroleum Argus in 1996 
(see Fig. 4.3). This was a great improvement on the previous two 
years when dated Brent's share of the total slipped to under a 
quarter, leaving Forties as the most actively traded grade. 
The decline of physical Brent volumes has prompted the 
development of an alternative market based on Forties. With 
production rising sharply as new fields such as Scott and Nelson 
are brought into the blend and a more diverse ownership structure 
involving 40 companies, the Forties blend now has the potential to 
replace Brent in the longer run. A trial forward paper contract 
known as "18-day'' Forties is currently being traded one month 
ahead, usually at a differential to the 15-day Brent market. But 
displacing Brent as a price marker is not a simple task since, like 
WTI, it supports an elaborate structure of derivative trading 
instruments which would also need to be replaced. 
4.2.2 United Kingdom 
Crude oil production in the UK offshore sector is still on an upward 
trend, although delays to new offshore fields and unexpected 
problems with existing fields meant that output actually fell in 
1996 instead of rising sharply as originally predicted. UK crude 
production (including onshore fields) averaged just over 2.5 million 
b/d in 1996, about 10,000 b/d less than in 1995. 
Thirteen new fields came on stream in 1996 -Columba B 
(7,000 b/d), Pelican (36,000 b/d) and Magnus South (10,000 b/d), 
part of the Brent system; Andrew/Cyrus (55,000 b/d), Arkwright 
(7,000 b/d) and Thelma (25,000 b/d), part of the Forties system; 
Nevis (20,000 b/d) and Fergus (10,000 b/d), both of which load 
offshore as part of the Beryl and Fife streams respectively; the 
offshore Teal area fields (50,000 b/d); the offshore Harding field 
(60,000 b/d) which was delayed from 1996. The Banff field (35,000 
b/d) was on an extended well-test during 1996, but will not start 
properly until 1998. Although the Douglas (40,000 b/d) and Lennox 
(30,000 b/d) fields in Liverpool Bay started up in 1996 they suffered 
from serious technical problems which constrained Douglas' output 
and delayed Lennox until 1997. 
4.2lpage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 163/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Table 4.3 United Kingdom export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt b/d 
Forties Blend 37.0 0.28 878,000 
Brent Blend 38.0 0.18 750,000 
Flotta Blcnd 37.4 0.97 224,000 
Fulmar 40.0 0.30 123,000 
Bcryl 37.0 0.40 93,000 
Albn 19.0 1.26 65,000 
Gryphon 21.0 0.40 38,000 
Fifc 36.0 0.00 38,000 
Harding 20.0 0.60 33,000 
DougladLcnnox 44.0145.0 0.510.25 33,000 
Blcnhcim 40.0 0.00 17,000 
Milureen 38.5 0.00 9.500 
Production is expected to average just over 2.8 million b/d in 
1997, an increase of 240,000 b/d on 1996, as a further 13 fields are 
planned to come on stream, including the first production from 
Foinaven (120,000 Wd) west of Shetland. Other fields are Captain 
(63,000 Wd), the delayed J-Block -Judy & Joanne -(60,000 b/d), 
MacCulloch (60,000 b/d), Durward (38,000 b/d), Gannet E & 
F(20,OOO b/d), Dauntless (10,000 b/d), Curlew (45,000 b/d), Mallard 
(16,000 bid), Brae West (30,000 b/d), Erskine (30,000 b/d), Armada 
(25,000 b/d) and Kingfisher (37,000 b/d). 
Forties Blend is now the largest of the UKCS crude streams 
since the addition of the 180,000 b/d Scott field in late 1993 and 
Nelson in 1994 (see Table 4.3). Further increases in UK production 
are expected in 1998 as more new fields are commissioned and 
existing fields are re-developed. Nearly $2 billion is being spent on 
the Brent field in order to recover an extra 34 million barrels of oil 
and 1,500 billion cubic feet of gas, extending the life of the field for 
at least another ten years, but the volume of Brent Blend crude is 
expected to continue declining slowly over the rest of the decade. 
Brent Blend, which now combines the former Brent and 
Ninian blends into a single export stream is still the most 
important crude in the North Sea market. Although it is no longer 
the largest UK export crude by volume, it remains the reference 
grade against which all other North Sea and Atlantic Basin crudes 
are priced. The market for Brent is therefore watched with close 
attention by the international oil trading community. 
Between 40 and 50 cargoes of Brent Blend are available each 
month and the eventual ownership and destination of each cargo is 
carefully monitored in case anyone attempts to squeeze the market, 
as has occasionally happened. With so many other grades of crude 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2fpage 7

--- Page 164/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
oil being priced against Brent, the temptation to manipulate the 
market is immense. However, successful squeezes are rare since 
the main equity producers are usually prepared to release 
additional cargoes from their refining systems if the market gets 
tight since they have a vested interest in the continued successful 
operation of the Brent market. 
The physical Brent market normally trades 500,000 barrel 
cargoes available for lifting 10 to 25 days ahead and most market 
assessments for dated Brent are based on a continuously moving 
market "window" covering this period. Dated Brent is either traded 
outright at fmed prices or, more commonly, at a differential to 
either the 15-day forward Brent market or the IPE Brent futures 
screen. But companies that want a more precise time frame can use 
the CFD market to establish a price for a particular delivery week 
within the range covered by the dated market. The dated Brent 
market is therefore exposed to a complex set of arbitrage 
opportunities that not only help to keep prices in line with other 
related markets, but can also move prices in unexpected ways. 
The other UKCS export crudes, mainly Forties, Flotta, Fulm,ar 
and Beryl, are usually priced at a differential to dated Brent (see 
Fig. 4.4). Although they are mainly relatively light crudes, Flotta 
has a much higher sulphur content than most North Sea crudes 
and normally trades at a discount to dated Brent. Production of 
heavy crudes is rising, however, now that Alba, Gryphon and 
Harding (20Q API) have reached peak output. And more heavy 
crudes, Foinaven (2F API) and Captain (20g API), are coming on 
stream in 1997. 
More than 60 oil and energy companies are now involved in 
the UK sector of the North Sea, although many of these have 
assigned their share of production to a partner in the field in 
production. Nearly 40 per cent of the oil produced from the UK 
sector of the North Sea is actually in the hands of just three 
companies: BP, Exxon and Royal Dutch/Shell. BP was the largest 
producer in 1995 with just under 400,000 b/d, followed by Exxon 
and Shell with nearly 300,000 b/d each, the two companies having a 
long-standing agreement to develop UKCS oilfields jointly. The 
next largest producers are Amerada Hess and Enterprise with just 
over 140,000 b/d each. Other companies producing more than 
50,000 b/d include EEP -Elf Enterprise Petroleum -(89,000 b/d), 
Texaco (83,000 b/d), Conoco (80,000 b/d), Chevron (75,000 b/d), 
Deminex (73,000 b/d), Mobil (71,000 b/d), Elf (60,000 b/d) and 
Marathon (51,000 b/d). 
4.2lpage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 165/964 ---
I 
4 Crude oil markets 
0.501 
2.00 1 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.4 North Sea crudes minus dated Brent 
4.2.3 Norway 
Oil production in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea continues 
to expand steadily, averaging 3.1 million b/d in 1996, an increase of 
340,000 b/d over 1995. Output is expected to rise again in 1997 to 
an average of 3.4 million b/d. 
Most of the growth last year came from four large new fields 
which came on stream in 1996 and reached their peak in 1996 -
Statfjord North (70,000 b/d), Fray (40,000 b/d), Troll (190,000 b/d) 
and Heidrun (200,000 b/d). A fifth field, Yme (50,000 b/d), was 
delayed until February 1996. Fray is part of the Oseberg system 
and piped to Sture, but Troll and Heidrun are loaded offshore and 
available as separate grades (see Table 4.4). 
Five new fields are planned for 1997 adding a further 470,000 
b/d of peak capacity. Vigdis (100,000 b/d), which is part of the 
Gullfaks system, came onstream five months ahead of schedule in 
January 1997. Three of the remainder -Norne (205,000 b/d), 
Balder (73,000 b/d), Njord (70,000 b/d) -will load offshore, while 
Tordis East (25,000 b/d) will form part of the Gullfaks system. Since 
Norway can only consume a small fi-action of the oil it produces, the 
country is a major exporter and it has now overtaken Iran as the 
second largest crude exporter in the world after Saudi Arabia. 
In the Norwegian sector of the North Sea, the government 
plays a much larger role in the development and operation of oil 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2ipage 9

--- Page 166/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
fields than in the UK. Norway's state oil company, Statoil, is the 
biggest player as it has both its own equity share of production, 
464,000 b/d (including NGLs), and also manages the Norwegian 
government's direct financial involvement (GDFI), which amounted 
to a further 962,000 b/d (including NGLs) in 1995. Statoil ranks as 
the third largest net seller of crude in the world and is the biggest 
exporter of North Sea oil. The company sold 730 million barrels of 
crude in 1996 -equivalent to 2 million b/d. Statoil's principal 
market remains north-west Europe, but large volumes are also sold 
to North America. The company intends to focus more strongly on 
south-east Asia and the Mediterranean in the future. The 
remainder of Norway's output is owned by approximately 20 
European and American oil companies, including all the majors. 
The biggest private producers are Amoco, BP, Norsk Hydro, 
Phillips, Saga and Shell. 
Table 4.4 Norweg.ian export crudes, 7996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API 70wt b/d 
Statfj ord 38.0 0.27 759,000 
Oseberg 34.0 0.30 691,000 
Gull faks 28.6 0.40 513,000 
Ekofisk 43.0 0.21 509,000 
Troll 29.0 0.30 227,000 
Heidrun 29.0 0.49 209,000 
Draugen 39.8 0.15 145,000 
Sleipner 59.0 0.02 73,000 
Yme 38.6 0.17 22,000 
More than half Norway's crude production is loaded offshore at 
the Statfjord, Gullfaks, Draugen, Troll, Heidrun and Yme fields, 
while the remainder is piped ashore to terminals in the UK and 
Norway. Ekofisk is piped to the Tees River on the UK mainland, 
while Oseberg is piped to Sture in Norway. A small amount of 
Norwegian crude from the joint UK-Norway Murchison field is also 
available as part of the Brent system. Segregated production from 
the Gullfaks, Heidrun, Troll and Yme fields is also trans-shipped to 
Statoil's Mongstad terminal from where it can be exported to 
refineries outside NW Europe. 
Norway's crudes used to be all light and low in sulphur making 
them highly attractive to refiners in Europe and North America, 
but new production from the Heidrun and Troll fields in the 
Haltenbanken area is much heavier with an AF'I gravity of only 29" 
(see Table 4.4). Heidrun is also very acidic and can only be 
4.2/page 10 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 167/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
processed in a distillation column made of high quality steel, which 
limits its market to refineries that are able to take such crudes, like 
those on the US Gulf coast. Oseberg has a good gasoline yield and 
usually trades at a significant premium to Brent (see Fig. 4.4). 
Like all other North Sea crudes, Norway's crudes are usually 
priced at a differential to dated Brent. Norwegian oil producers do 
not have the same tax incentive to sell on the open market as 
UKCS producers since all upstream taxes are paid on the basis of a 
government-determined retrospective "norm" price. However, there 
is no shortage of Norwegian crude on the market since most of the 
producers have other reasons for t,rading their output. 
4.2.4 Denmark 
Compared with Norway and the UK, Denmark is a relatively small 
oil producer, averaging around 210,000 b/d in 1996. But like 
Norway and the UK it exports a large proportion of its production, 
importing other grades to meet domestic refinery demand. 
Production has risen steadily in recent years as new fields were 
brought onstream and further gains are planned for 1997. 
Denmark's crude is produced from a small group of offshore 
fields and piped ashore to form a single export blend, often known 
as DUC after the company which produces it, Dansk Undergrunds 
Consortium. DUC blend is medium gravity (34Q APIj, low sulphur 
(0.2 per cent) crude. The majority of the production comes from the 
Dan (63,000 b/d), Skjold (43,000 b/d), Gorrn (39,000 b/d) and Tyra 
(28,000 b/d) fields. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.2ipage 11

--- Page 168/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 169/964 ---
Mediterranean 
The major crude oil producers and exporters in the Mediterranean 
region are the countries of North Afiica, principally Algeria, Libya 
and Egypt, Syria and Tunisia (see Table 4.51. The Mediterranean 
market is also supplied on a regular basis by crude oil from the 
former Soviet Union, Iran and now Iraq. Cargoes of Iranian crude 
are sold fob Sidi Kerir, the Mediterranean terminal of the Surned 
pipeline west of Alexandria in Egypt. Limited Iraqi exports 
resumed in December 1996 under the terms of the UN oil-for-aid 
deal and about 60 per cent of the crude is sold fob Ceyhan, the 
export terminal for the Iraq-Turkey pipeline. Urals crude has 
become the most important price marker for the Mediterranean 
market, replacing spot sales of Iranian crudes which are now in 
short supply at Sidi Kerir as Iran increasingly favours term 
customers or direct sales to end-users. 
Table 4.5 Mediterranean crude production and exports, 1996 
country Production 
bld Exports 
b/d Capacity? 
b/d 
Algeria” x20,000 370,000 850,000 
Libya 1,400,000 1,100,000 1,500,000 
Egypt:’; 850,000 400,000 850,000 
Syria 570,000 350,000 560,000 
Tunisia 90,000 55,000 95,000 
Russia+ na 900,000 na 
Iran$ na 600,000 na 
Iraq3 na 360,000 na 
Kazakstan:! na 60,000 -na 
�excluding condensates $ Mediterranean exports only � end year 
4.3.1 Russia 
Although Russia is not a Mediterranean oil producer as such, up to 
1million b/d of crude is exported into the Mediterranean from the 
former Soviet Union. The vast majority of the exports are Urals, a 
medium gravity (33” MI, 1.4 per cent sulphur) sour crude that is 
now the most important price marker in the Mediterranean spot 
market (see Fig. 4.5). Small volumes of higher quality Siberian 
Light and Kazakstan’s very light Tengiz crude are also exported 
from the Black Sea ports. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.3fpage 1

--- Page 170/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Russian crude oil exports used to be highly seasonal, often 
falling to quite low levels in the first quarter as crude was diverted 
to domestic markets during the winter, but the pattern broke down 
in 1996/97 as the government maximised export volumes for state 
needs. The continuing need for hard currency and reliable payment 
has ensured that Russian oil exports are maintained on an annual 
basis, despite sharp falls in production since 1989. Following the 
independence of the Baltic States, the Mediterranean has become 
the most important sea-borne market for Russian crude. Between 
700 and 900,000 b/d of Russian crude is also exported by the 
Druzhba (Friendship) pipeline to east and central Europe. Both 
pipeline and seaborne exports are priced at a discount to dated 
Brent that varies seasonally, being wider in the summer and 
narrower in the winter. Price differentials have firmed since the 
introduction in mid-1995 of a system of official export "co-
ordinators" who control the flow of oil through the ports ,and 
pipelines. 
Most of the Urals crude (600-700,000 b/d) is shipped to the 
Mediterranean market via the Black Sea port of Novorossiysk, but 
around 150-250,000 b/d is also exported from the Ukrainian port of 
Odessa. While there is an fob market in Urals at Novorossiysk, 
frequent loading delays at the port have deterred buyers from using 
their own vessels to collect the crude. As a result, most of the trade 
in Urals is on a delivered (cif) basis with the crude being 
transported either in Russian vessels or in vessels chartered by 
Russian exporters. Prices for Urals crude into the Mediterranean 
are based on delivery to Augusta in Sicily, with purchasers paying 
a premium (or discount) based on the differential freight cost for 
delivery to other ports. In addition, about 100,000 b/d of Siberian 
Light crude oil is exported from Tuapse. 
Kazakstan 
Direct shipments from Kazakstan began in 1996 as the 
Chevroflobil joint venture Tengizchevroil (TCO) opened up a 
number of new export routes for its growing production. The 
baseload of Tengiz exports is shipped through Russia's pipeline 
system allowing TCO to sell around 70,000 b/d through ports and 
the Druzhba pipeline. But Kazakstan only has a limited capacity 
allocation on the Russian pipeline system and delays in the 
construction of the 1.3mn b/d Tengiz-Novorossiysk pipeline have 
forced TCO to find alternative export routes, including rail to the 
Black Sea port of Odessa (40,000 b/d), pipeline from Baku to Ali 
Bairamly and then rail to Batumi in Georgia (20,000 b/d), and rail 
to Porvoo in Finland, where Neste buys 25,000 b/d of Tengiz crude. 
4.3Ipage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 171/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
I -UralscifMed -------EsSider- Suez Blend - Iran Heay Sidi Kenr 
0. 50’.OO I 
-3.50 
-4.00 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan 95 Jan96 Jan97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.5 Mediterranean crudes rninus &ted Brent 
Avoiding the Russian pipeline syst.em keeps the oil separate, 
allowing TCO to realise the higher value of its very light (46" API) 
low sulphur (0.5 per cent) crude. Tengiz is of a similar quality to 
Saharan Blend and was selling at a premium of over 80 centshl to 
dated Brent in early 1997. 
4.3.2 Algeria 
Algeria produces about 850,000 b/d of generally light crude oil, from 
more than 50 oil fields, most of which is pooled to form Saharan 
Blend (see Table 4.6). More than 350,000 b/d of Algeria's crude oil 
output is exported. Production is rising despite Opec quotas now 
that Algeria has allowed foreign companies to invest in its 
upstream sector. Foreign oil companies -Agip (70,000 bid), Arc0 
(30,000 b/d), Cepsa (20,000 bid), PetroCanada (20,000 bid) -
accounted for 140,000 bid of crude production in early 1997, and 
Repsol, Andarko and Louisiana Land and Energy (LL&E) plan to 
bring a further 35,000 b/d onstream by the end of the year. 
Most of the output of Saharan Blend is sold directly by 
Algeria's state-owned oil company, Sonatrach, at negotiated 
monthly prices under a framework of term contracts. Crude from 
the Zarzaitine field, which straddles the border with Tunisia, is 
marketed separately also through term deals or by tender. In 
addition to its crude oil streams, Algeria produces a significant 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.3fpage 3

--- Page 172/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
volume of condensate (equivalent to about 550,000 b/d of oil) which 
is sold separately. 
Sonatrach sets contract prices for Saharan Blend fob Algeria, 
at a differential to dated Brent, towards the end of each month for 
liftings during the coming month. The differential can vary 
between customers. 
Tuble 4.6Algerian export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API OJWt bld 
Algerian Condensate 65.0 0.00 550,000 
Saharan Blend 44.0 0.10 723,000 
Zarzaitine 42.0 0.10 37,000 
4.3.3 Libya 
Libya has the capacity to produce approximately 1.5 million b/d of 
crude, but its actual output is restricted to slightly less than this by 
its output quota as a member of Opec (see Table 4.7). Plans to 
expand capacity and encourage investment by foreign oil companies 
have been hampered first by the UN embargo on the sale of some 
oil industry equipment to Libya and now the US Iran/Libya law 
which was passed in October 1996. Nevertheless, some European 
companies have not been deterred and the new Murzuk field, which 
is a .joint venture between Repsol, Total and OMV, came onstream 
in December 1996. 
About a third of Libya's oil output (some 450,000 b/d) is 
operated by European companies, Agip, Veba, OMV and 
Wintershall, while the rest is owned by Libya's National Oil 
Corporation (NOC). Just over 1 million b/d is exported, with 
Oilinvest -an NOC affiliate -(220,000 b/d) and Agip (200,000 
b/d) being the biggest lifters. OMV takes 80,000 b/d, Repsol and 
Turkish refiner Tupras 60,000 b/d each, and Veba 55,000 b/d. 
Oilinvest used to lift twice as much, but has cut purchases in 
favour of North Sea grades. Occasional spot sales are also made to 
Asian customers like China and South Korea. 
Since 1993, Libya has begun to enforce more rigidly the 
'restricted destination' clause in its oil sales contracts and has 
reduced its sales of Es Sider crude to traders in favour of equity 
producers and refiners. This has virtually killed the spot market in 
Libyan Es Sider crude which had formerly acted as a price marker 
for other Mediterranean crudes, most notably Syrian Light. Libyan 
Es Sider is priced off dated Brent and usually trades at a 
4.3Ipage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 173/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
differential of between -$0.30 and +$0.30harrel against the North 
Sea grade. 
The new Murzuk field came onstream in December 1996 at 
45,000 b/d and production is expected to rise to 200,000 b/d by 1998. 
It is a very light crude (46API) and of better quality than Es Sider 
or Sarir. Until the export pipeline and terminal are completed in 
late 1997, Murzuk will be refined at Libya's Zawia refinery and the 
equity participants will lift an equivalent volume of other grades. 
Tuble 4.7 Libyan export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"AFT %wt b/d 
Rrega 40.0 0.20 
Bu Allifel 40.0 0.30 170,000 
Es Sider 37.0 0.27 445,000 
Sarir 36.0 0.20 
%ueitin a 41.0 0.20 100,000 
Murmk 44.0 minimal 45,000 . 
y~13acerrtber 1996. 
4.3.4 Egypt 
Egypt produces .just under 850,000 b/d of crude oil and about 35,000 
b/d of condensates, principally from fields in the Gulf of Suez with 
additional volumes from fields in the Qattara Depression and the 
Libyan Plateau in the north-west of the country (see Table 4.8). 
Crude production rose marginally in 1996 averaging 850,000 bid 
(890,000 b/d including condensates) and is expected to remain 
around this level in 1997. Crude fi-om the Gulf of Suez is either 
shipped eastward through the Red Sea or is transported to the 
Mediterranean terminal at Sidi Kerir via the Sumed pipeline. 
Egypt refines just over half its production and exports the 
remainder (400,000 b/d). 
The principal producer of crude in Egypt is the Gulf of Suez 
Petroleum Company (Gupco), a joint venture between the Egyptian 
General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC) and Amoco, which 
combines the output from its Gulf of Suez fields to produce nearly 
400,000 b/d of Suez Blend. The other major oil producers in Egypt 
are: Petrobel (EGPC and Agip affiliate IEOC), which produces 
230,000 b/d fi-om the Belayim and Ras Gharib fields; Suez Oil 
Company (Deminex, Shell, Repsol and EGPC), which produces 
70,000 b/d from the Ras Budran, Ras Fanar and Zeit Bay fields in 
the Gulf of Suez; Agiba (Agip), which produces 50,000 b/d; Khalda 
(Repsol, Phoenix and Samsung), which produces 35,000 b/d in the 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.3fpage 5

--- Page 174/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Western Desert; and the Zaafarana Oil Company (British Gas, 
EGPC, Union Pacific, and Yukong), which started producing 20,000 
b/d of heavy, high sulphur crude from the Gulf of Suez in early 
1995. 
Amoco sells its share of Suez Blend output (130,000 b/d) on its 
own behalf, while EGPC exports a further 180,000 b/d. More than 
half of EGPC's exports are sold under government-to-government 
contracts (more than 100,000 b/d to Israel and South Africa) or into 
minor equity holders (30,000 b/d). A further 50,000 b/d is sold to 
international refiners, leaving just 25,000 b/d which is sold to a 
range of term customers. New production of heavy crudes such as 
Zaafarana is likely to be exported mainly to the US. 
Table 4.8Egyptian export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API OJWt bld 
Suez Blend 33.0 1.4 395,000 
Helayim 26.0 2.2 206,000 
Ras Gharib 25.0 3.0 20,000 
Kas Fanar 32.5 1.G 1 
Ras Budran 24.8 2.4 1 70,000 
%pit Hay 34.5 1.4 1 
Zaafarana 21.0 3.3 20.000 
At the end of each month, the Egyptian General Petroleum 
Corporation sets a formula price for Suez Blend for the coming 
month. The formula used to be a weighted average of a discount to 
Platt’s dated Brent quotes (60 per cent), a discount to Iranian 
Heavy quotes (20 per cent) and Suez Blend quotes (20 per cent), but 
EGPC switched to a simple differential to dated Brent from 
January 1996 after losing term contracts with customers who 
complained that the price was too high. Other Egyptian grades 
used to be priced relative to Suez Blend, but are now also priced 
against dated Brent. The company was criticised in the past for not 
being suficiently responsive to the market when setting its official 
selling price for Suez Blend. 
4.3.5 Syria 
Syria's crude oil output has dropped to around 560,000 b/d after 
peaking at 600,000 b/d two years ago. About 225,000 b/d is refined 
domestically at the Banias and Homs refineries leaving around 
335,000 b/d for export (see Table 4.9). The oldest fields, in the 
north-east of the country, are produced by the Syrian Petroleum 
4.3Ipage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 175/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Company (SPCI and yield heavy crudes with gravities below 25" 
API which are blended to form Souedie. The more recently-
discovered fields further south, exploited by the Al-Furat Petroleum 
Company (a joint venture between SPC, Shell and Deminex) yield 
much lighter grades with gravities between 30" and 45" API. These 
are blended with 60,000 b/d of similar crude produced by Deir ez 
Zor Petroleum Company (a joint venture between SPC and Elf) to 
form Syrian Light. Al-Furat production is falling more rapidly than 
expected and tough upstream terms have discouraged most 
companies from exploring in Syria. The only new production is from 
Tullow Oil's 7,000 b/d Kishima field which is scheduled to come 
onstream in April 1997. 
Between 10 and 13 cargoes of Syrian Light and four cargoes of 
Souedie (each of 600,000 barrels) are exported each month with 
sales handled by Syrian state marketing company Sytrol at prices 
related to dated Brent. Syrian Light used to be priced against 
Libyan Es Sider, but Sytrol switched to dated Brent at the end of 
1993 as the spot market for Es Sider contracted (see Section 4.3.3). 
Much of the output of Syrian Light is lifted under term contract by 
European refiners and traders. In 1996, the main buyers were BP, 
Shell, Elf, Total, Mobil, Agip, Isab, Oil Energy, Cepsa and Repsol. 
Table 4.9 Syrian export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bld 
Syrian Tight 36.0 0.80 410,000 
Souedie (Suwaydiah) 25.0 3.00 150,000 
Since the spot trade in Es Sider collapsed in 1993, Syrian Light 
has become the de fucto light sweet price marker for the 
Mediterranean market. Although lifted under term contracts which 
require written permission to resell Syrian crude, it is estimated 
that approximately 60 per cent of Syrian crude exports was sold on 
to other companies by lifters or was put through processing 
arrangements outside the lifters' own refining systems. But in 
January 1994, Sytrol began to enforce the onward sales clause more 
rigorously and, while this may not have curtailed the spot trade in 
Syrian Light completely, it has made it less liquid and less visible. 
This has deprived the Mediterranean market of a light sweet price 
marker and reduced spot. market transparency. 
Hemy Souedie crude is also priced against dated Brent. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.3ipage 7

--- Page 176/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
4.3.6 Iran 
Sales of Iranian crude oil on an fob basis from the northern 
terminal of the Sumed pipeline at Sidi Kerir have traditionally 
played an important role in the Mediterranean market. Although 
the volumes were never very large, the trade had a significant 
impact since it provided a spot market reference price for Mid-east 
Gulf crudes that could be used when negotiating term contracts 
with producers (see Section 4.6.2). 
However, Iran cut the volumes of oil available for sale to third-
parties at Sidi Kerir in 1994, partly through increased sales of 
crude to end-users on term contracts, and partly by enforcing the 
restricted destination and re-sale clauses in its term contracts. This 
has led to a dramatic fall in sales to traders and also to spot trade 
in Iranian crude at Sidi Kerir. The volume of "public" spot trade 
was further reduced in 1995 when the US government extended its 
embargo on purchases of Iran crude to the foreign subsidiaries of 
US companies. NIOC now sells exclusively to end-users. As a result 
the Sidi Kerir spot market has become both less liquid and less 
transparent. According to the Argus Crude Oil Deals Database, the 
number of confirmed spot deals at Sidi Kerir involving Iranian 
crude fell to around 60 in 1994 and 1995 compared with around 200 
a few years before. Spot trade for Iranian crude in the 
Mediterranean remains very quiet, especially now more cargoes are 
moving to eastern refiners who are prepared to pay a higher price. 
About 600,000 b/d of Iranian crude is trans-shipped through 
Sumed, but less than 100,000 b/d is sold on the spot market. 
4.3.7 Tunisia 
Tunisian crude production averaged only 90,000 b/d in 1995 as new 
fields failed to replace falling output, further reducing its export 
potential. Although Tunisia's domestic consumption is around 
80,000 b/d, the only refinery, Bizerte, has a capacity of 34,000 b/d 
and is unable to meet demand so the balance is met by product 
imports. 
Tunisia's main export grades are the light sweet Zarzaitine 
(43G AF'I, 0.1 per cent sulphur) and the heavy sourer Ashtart. (29? 
AF'I, 1per cent sulphur). 'Zarzaitine' blend is actually a mixture of 
crudes produced from fields in both Algeria and Tunisia and 
exported from the Tunisian terminal of La Skhirra. Tunisia's share 
of the joint Algerian-Tunisian Zarzaitine field is now 72,000 b/d and 
the blend also includes crude from Tunisia's el-Borma (31,000 b/dj, 
Sidi el-Kileni (13,500 b/d) and Belli (7,600 b/d) fields. Ashtart is 
produced and loaded offshore and production averaged 18,000 b/d 
4.3Ipage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 177/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
in 1995. Tunisia's crude exports are all sold by spot tender. Exxon 
is the biggest buyer of Zarzaitine and Repsol of Ashtart. 
The Tunisian state oil company, Entreprise Tunisienne 
d'Activites Petrolieres (ETAP) has a large shareholding in Tunisia's 
oil production, but the international oil companies have played an 
important role in the development of Tunisia's oil. Foreign 
companies currently producing oil in Tunisia are Agip (el-Borma), 
Kufpec -a Kuwaiti-owned company (Sidi el-Kileni), Marathon 
(Belli and Ezzaouia), British Gas (Cercina and others), Elf 
(Ashtart), Neste and Saniedan -a US company (Tazarka). 
4.3.8 Iraq 
Limited Iraqi oil exports resumed in December 1996 under the 
terms of the UN oil-for-aid deal (Resolution 986). Iraq is allowed to 
export up to $2bn worth of oil over a renewable six-month period 
and exports are strictly controlled by UN monitors. In the first half 
of 1997, Iraq exported around 360,000 b/d of Kirkuk blend (3@API, 
2 per cent sulphur) through the Iraq-Turkey pipeline to the 
Mediterranean port of Ceyhan. 26 companies signed term contracts 
and the biggest customer was the Turkish refiner, Tupras, which 
took 75,000 b/d. Exports to Europe are priced at a differential to 
dated Brent and exports to the US at a differential to spot WTI (see 
Appendix 4.2). Export volumes vary according to the realised price 
and changes in the formula price must be agreed by the UN. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.3fpage 9

--- Page 178/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 179/964 ---
4.4 West Africa 
The major oil producers in west Africa are Nigeria, Angola and 
Gabon (see Table 4.10). Nigeria is the only remaining member of 
Opec after Gabon left the organisation in June 1996. Smaller 
amounts of crude oil are also produced by Congo (270,000 b/d), 
Cameroon (110,000 b/d), Equatorial Guinea (60,000 b/d), Zaire 
(20,000 b/d), the Ivory Coast (20,000 b/d), South Africa (20,000 b/d) 
and Benin (3,000 b/d). Production began from Equatorial Guinea's 
offshore Zafiro field offshore in August 1996 and from South 
Africa's offshore Oribi field in early 1997. Crudes from the Congo, 
Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Zaire and Ivory Coast are also 
exported for sale on the international market. West African crudes 
are generally sweet and give a good yield of middle distillates, 
making them highly attractive to Asia-Pacific refiners who now 
regularly compete for supplies with European and US refiners (see 
Fig. 4.6). Up to 1 million b/d of west African crude now moves east 
when prices in the Atlantic basin are low relative to the Asia-Pacific 
market. 
Table 4.10 West African crude production and exports, 1996 
country Production Exports Capacity? 
bld b/d b/d 
Nigeria" 2,060,000 1,790,000 2,200,000 
Angola 706,000 675,000 720,000 
Gabon 370,000 350,000 370,000 
Congo 200,000 180,000 270,000 
Cameroon 106,000 85,000 110,000 
Equatorial Guinea 20,000 20,000 40,000 
* excluding condensate ’ end year I 
4.4.1 Nigeria 
Nigeria is Africa's largest producer of crude oil, with output now 
running at around 2.2 million, well above its Opec quota of 1.865 
million b/d (see Table 4.11). Over the past year, joint ventures with 
foreign companies have boosted output by 200,000 bid and further 
expansion is planned to meet a capacity target of 2.5 million b/d by 
2000. 
The country exports nearly 1.8 million b/d, chiefly to the USA 
and southern Europe, but increasing volumes are now moving to 
India and east Asia. Nigeria's oil production is centred around the 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.4tpage 1

--- Page 180/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Ta.ble 4.11 Nigerian export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production Main foreign 
"API 7owt bld participants 
Bonny Light 36.7 0.12 430,000 Shell/Agip/Elf 
Bonny Medium 25.2 0.23 70,000 Shell/Agip/Elf 
Brass River 40.9 0.09 130,000 AgipPhillips 
Escravos 36.2 0.14 400,000 Chcvron 
Forcados 29.7 0.29 430,000 Shell/Agip/Elf 
Pcnnington 36.6 0.07 80,000 Tcxaco/Chcvron 
Odudu 28.5 0.18 105,000 Elf 
Qua Iboc 35.8 0.12 360,000 Mobil 
Oso Condensate 47.7 0.05 110,000 Mobil 
Ima" 45.0 0.10 40.000 Abaccm 
a~productior7, from ofFshore Ngo field (Trrrrra bhd) began. in. rJan.uaiy 1997 
Niger Delta in the southeast of the country and adjacent offshore 
areas. Oil is produced under equity joint ventures including a 
number of multi-national oil companies as operators such as Shell 
(965,000 b/d), Mobil (365,000 b/d), Chevron (415,000 b/d), 
Agipphillips (140,000 b/d), Elf (135,000 b/d), and Texaco (80,000 
b/d). Mobil also produces 110,000 b/d of Oso condensate which is not 
covered by Nigeria's Opec quota. 
Just under half of Nigeria's crude oil exports used to be sold 
under one-year term contracts to around 30 companies, with 
volumes ranging from 10,000 b/d to 40,000 b/d. But Nigeria's term 
contracts are in disarray at present after 23 term contracts were 
cancelled in March 1996 and a further 12 axed from September 
1996. The Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) is 
trying to renew term arrangements but a high degree of 
uncertainty remains and most of NNPC's customers are effectively 
spot buyers. 
All applicants for crude term contracts with Nigeria must show 
an annual turnover of at least $100 million and a net worth of $40 
million. They must also demonstrate a commitment to the 
development of the Nigerian economy. Failure to commit or make 
such investment within six months of signing a deal will cause the 
contract to be cancelled and the contract holder to forfeit a $1 
million bond that they are required to post with a Nigerian bank. 
Towards the end of each month, NNPC sets official selling 
price differentials to dated Brent for its export grades for the 
coming month (see Appendix 4.2). Until 1993, Nigeria's sweeter 
crudes, Pennington, Brass River, Bonny Light and Qua Iboe were 
all priced at the same level. In 1993, in an effort to maximise 
revenues from the sale of sweet crudes, Nigeria introduced 
differential pricing for its sweetest crudes. Since then, Pennington 
4.4lpage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 181/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
and Brass River have both been priced at a premium to Bonny 
Light and Qua Iboe. 
Nigeria's standard pricing formula applies the announced 
differentials to dated Brent quotations over the five days following 
the date of the bill of lading. However, Nigeria also offers a delayed 
pricing option and an early pricing option. Under the deferred 
pricing option, prices are calculated on five days of dated Brent 
quotes starting 14 days after bill of lading. Prices under the delayed 
option are at premium to those under the standard pricing option 
and it is popular when the market is in backwardation. The delayed 
option was first introduced in 1991 and it re-appeared in 1994. For 
May 1996 the premium was 45 centsharrel, reflecting the strong 
backwardation in the Brent market against which Nigerian grades 
are priced. The early pricing option is used when the market is in 
contango and allows lifters to price cargoes 5 days prior to the bill 
of lading. 
4.4.2 Angola 
Angola produces approximately 720,000 b/d of crude oil; most of 
this (410,000 b/d) is produced offshore by Chevron from the 
Cabinda enclave, which is separated from the rest of Angola by a 
strip of Zairean territory (see Table 4.12). Early production from 
the Nemba and Lomba fields also forms part of the Cabinda blend. 
Full production is scheduled for 1998. 
1.00 -
-0.50 -~ 
-? -~ 5 -1.00 eFA 
-1.50 -~ -~
-2.00 -2.50 
1-3.00 
Jan 90 Jan91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 
I 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.6 West African crudes minus dated Brent 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.4fpage 3

--- Page 182/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The remainder of Angola's oil production also comes mainly 
from offshore fields: Palanca, Soyo and Kiabo. Palanca blend 
(operated by Elf) output has reached 185,000 b/d since the Cobi and 
Pambi fields came on stream and is expected to rise to 195,000 in 
1997. Output of the offshore Soyo blend (operated by Texaco) rose 
sharply to 100,000 b/d in 1996 following the installation of the 
Bague platform. The 5,000 b/d Kiabo field is operated by the 
Angolan state oil company, Sonangol. 
The onshore Soyo fields were shut in when the area was 
occupied by Unita forces in January 1993, but Petrofina re-started 
production at 5,000 b/d in early 1996 and output has now reached 
14,000 b/d. Petrofina plans to restore output to its original level of 
25,000 b/d by the end of 1997. 
Around 30,000 b/d of Angola's output is refined locally, leaving 
the remaining 680,000 b/d available for export. Production is 
expected to rise sharply to 780,000 b/d by 1998 as Chevron and Elf 
increase offshore output following a series of new finds. 
Table 4.12 Angolan export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API 70wt bld 
Cabindaf 3 2 0.2 415,000 
Palanca 39 0.1 185,000 
Sovo (onshore)" 3 4 0.2 5,000 
Soyo (offshore) 34 0.2 85;000 
*re-started early 1996 f. includes early production, from Nernba 
Chevron produces 40 per cent of Cabinda output ( 165,000 b/d), 
while its partners Elf and Agip each have around 10 per cent each. 
The remainder is sold by the state oil company, Sonangol, mostly 
under annual framework contracts, with each term cargo priced on 
an ad hoe basis. 
4.4.3 Gabon 
Gabon's crude production reached 370,000 b/d in 1996 following the 
commissioning of new fields, greatly exceeding its Opec quota of 
only 287,000 b/d. But Gabon finally left Opec in June 1996 after 
failing to pay its Opec membership dues for a number of years. 
Output is expected to decline to 350,000 b/d in 1998 and to 260,000 
b/d by 2001 according to upstream consultants, Wood Mackenzie. 
More than half of the output of light sweet crude from the country's 
onshore fields is piped northwards to Elfs Cap Lopez terminal 
where it is sold as Rabi Light, while the remainder is sent south to 
4.4Ipage 4

--- Page 183/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Shell's Gamba terminal where it is blended with crude of a similar 
quality from the Gamba field to form Rabi Blend (see Table 4.13). 
Table 4.13 Gabonese export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity 
"MI Sulphur 
%wt Production 
b/d 
Rabi Light 33.0 0.1 150,000 
Rabi Blend 33.8 0.1 100,000 
Mandji (incl Obando) 30.0 1.1 115,000 
Lucina 38.0 0.0 4,000 
M'Rga 35.5 0.1 4,500 
Ogwendjo 34.0 0.0 6,000 
Gabon's second most important crude stream, the heavy, 
medium sour Mand.ji, is produced by Elf from a network of offshore 
fields and is also loaded via the Cap Lopez terminal where it is co-
mingled with Obando (owned by French independent, Perenco, and 
Lasmo). Gabon's other crude streams, which account for the 
remaining 11,500 b/d of Gabon's capacity, are Lucina (now owned 
by Perenco), M'Bya (produced by Perenco), and Ogwendjo (85 per 
cent also owned by Perenco). All are produced from offshore fields, 
are similar in quality to Rabi and are loaded from floating storage. 
4.4.4 Congo 
Congo produces 270,000 b/d of crude oil ranging in gravity from 
223 to 36.9"API from a number of offshore and onshore fields. Elf s 
new deep water field, Nkossa, came on stream in mid-1996 at 
around 70,000 bid and is now producing 120,000 b/d. Another deep 
water field, Kitina, operated by Agip will come on stream by 1999, 
adding at least a further 30,000 b/d. The only foreign operating 
companies currently producing oil in Congo are Elf (255,000 b/d) 
and Agip (45,000 b/d), although Shell, Chevron and Occidental have 
both signed exploration and production deals in the country. Congo 
has a refinery capacity of 21,000 b/d, the rest of its crude output 
being exported. Congo's principal export grade is Djeno, a low 
sulphur, heavy crude with an API gravity of 26.8' and a 0.37 per 
cent sulphur content. Elfs Nkossa crude is much lighter with an 
AF'I gravity of 38" and has a lower sulphur content. 
4.4.5 Cameroon 
Cameroon produces approximately 112,000 b/d of oil ranging from 
17" to 42.5OAP1, mostly from offshore fields in the Rio del Rey 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.4fpage 5

--- Page 184/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Basin. The country's principal operator is Elf, which produced 
around 90,000 bld in 1996, while most of the remainder of the 
country's output is produced by Pecten International and French 
independent, Perenco. Production from the Kribi field started in 
early 1997 boosting production by 12,000 bld, but declining output 
from other fields will cancel out the gains by 1998. Kribi is operated 
by Elf (51 per cent) and the other participants are Chevron (30 per 
cent), state Hydrocongo (18 per cent) and Energy Africa -an 
affiliate of South Africa's Engen -(4 per cent). 
Cameroon has the capacity to refine 43,000 bld of crude at its 
refinery at Limbe, most of which is from domestic output although 
some lighter Nigerian Brass River is also imported. The major 
export grade is Kole, which has a gravity of 34.9" API. It also 
produces Lokele (20" API) and Moudi crudes. 
4.4.6 Equatorial Guinea 
Equatorial Guinea's first oil field started production in August 
1996. The offshore Zafiro field operated by Mobil was producing 
40,000 bld in early 1997 and is expected to reach 80,000 bld by the 
end of the year. Zafiro is a low sulphur crude similar in quality to 
Angolan Cabinda and has an API gravity of 32". Another new 
discovery, Jade, will start production towards the end of 1997 <and 
will be tied into the Zafiro platform. 
4.4.7 Zaire 
Zaire produces 20,000 bld of medium gravity (31.7" API) crude for 
export. Exxon is the main purchaser. 
4.4.8 Ivory Coast 
Ivory Coast produces 20,000 bld of Lion crude. The field is owned 
and operated by United Meridian (UMC) and began production in 
1995. All Lion crude is sold on a term basis and moves to South 
America and Europe. In 1996, Lion prices were negotiated at dated 
Brent minus $0.45/bl. 
4.4Ipage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 185/964 ---
4.5 United States 
4.5.1 US crude market 
The United States is the largest crude oil market in the world. As 
well as being the second largest oil producer after Saudi Arabia it is 
also the biggest oil consumer, importing 7.5 million b/d of crude oil 
in 1996, just over half the crude required by US refineries (see 
Table 4.14). As a result, active spot markets have developed for 
both domestic and imported crude, which in turn have supported 
the growth of very large forward, futures and derivative markets. 
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) is the leading benchmark for the 
US domestic crude market since it forms the basis of the Nymex 
Light Sweet Crude futures contract (see Chapter 8). 
However, it is important to realise that the US domestic crude 
market operates differently from markets that have developed in 
other parts of the world. Virtually every barrel of domestic crude, 
with the exception of Alaskan North Slope (ANS), is traded, priced 
and transported by pipeline rather than on waterborne tankers and 
barges. In addition, the government's ban on exports of crude 
produced in the US (apart from ANS), and the relative isolation of 
the populated east (Padd I) and west coast (Padd V) markets from 
the major producing and refining areas on the US Gulf coast (Padd 
111)have had a strong influence on the way in which markets and 
patterns of trade have evolved. 
Table 4.14 US crude import dependence, 1996 
District Production Crude runs Imports Import 
b/d b/d b/d dependence 
Padd I 27,000 1,331,000 1,271,000 95.5% 
Padd I1 566,000 3,254,000 767,000 23.64 
Padd I11 3,158,000 6,629,000 4,967,000 74.98 
Padd IV 368,000 469,000 124,000 26.4% 
Padd V 2,352,000 2,498,000 353,000 14.18 
Total 6,471,000 14,181,000 7,482,000 52.8% 
Source: US DOE IEIA, Petroleum Supply ,Wonthly 
US crude is produced in many states, the most important of 
which are Texas, Alaska, California, Louisiana, Oklahoma, 
Wyoming, New Mexico and Kansas. In addition, there is rising 
production in the Gulf of Mexico from new offshore fields such as 
Auger and Mars. Prices for most domestic crudes are linked either 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.5fpage 1

--- Page 186/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
to cash prices for WTI or posted prices set by refiners for wellhead 
purchases. Because most domestic crude moves to both the market 
and the end user by pipeline, most barrels are traded on an fip (free 
in pipeline) basis either at the wellhead or at major gathering 
points such as Cushing, Oklahoma, Midland, Texas and St James, 
Louisiana (see Table 4.15). ANS is the main exception as it is 
moved by tanker from Alaska and can also now be exported. ANS is 
sold cif either on the US west coast or under term contract to Far 
East refiners such as Taiwan's CPC. 
Another key difference between trade in most domestic crudes 
and trade in imported crudes (or ANSI is the method and timing of 
delivery. Since most domestic crudes are transported by pipeline, 
trading is conducted and deliveries are made on a 'rateable' basis. 
This means a company can buy or sell crude over the entire course 
of the month at a rate of "x" b/d giving refiners the flexibility to run 
the crude as it is received, thus reducing storage costs. In addition, 
rateable sales make domestic crudes popular for filling small gaps 
in refiners' slates. In contrast, imported crudes are generally traded 
either as a single parcel priced either on an fob basis at the loading 
port or on a cif or out-turn basis at the delivery port. 
The most important "spot" crude market in the US is the cash 
WTI market, which also provides the underlying physical 
commodity for the Nymex WTI futures contract. Although it is a 
pipeline market, it does not trade on a rateable basis since there is 
sufficient storage capacity available at Cushing, Oklahoma to 
support a market which trades in highly flexible 'lots'. Cash WTI 
deals vary in size from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands 
of barrels for a given delivery month and are also traded forward 
for periods of several months ahead, providing an alternative to the 
futures market, particularly outside normal exchange hours or 
during a crisis such as the start of the Gulf War when the Nymex 
was closed. Cash WTI deals are either done on a fixed basis or more 
usually at a differential to the Nymex crude futures contract. But 
liquidity has declined since Nymex introduced its 24-hour "Access" 
trading system and the cash WTI market is now most active during 
the Platt’s pricing window which falls between the Nymex close 
and the start of Access trading (see Chapters 7 & 8). 
Posted prices are also set by refiners and crude oil gatherers to 
reflect the price that these companies will pay at the wellhead for a 
specific grade of crude on a given day. Most of the domestic crude in 
the US is still sold by producers on a postings related basis 
according to the Houston-based consultants Purvin & Gertz. These 
include widely traded grades such as WTI, WTS and LLS, as well 
as small streams of crude located near a specific refiner's or 
gatherer's system. The methods by which posted prices are set have 
4.5Ipage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 187/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
evolved over the years, but they were originally set to reflect 
market prices for a given crude less the gathering and 
transportation costs associated with bringing the crude from the 
wellhead to the market. 
Other spot markets and trading instruments have developed 
alongside the huge volume of posted prices trade. The "postings- 
plus" or "P-plus" markets developed in the late 'eighties and is 
widely used as a pricing mechanism. In nearly all cases P-plus 
trade is based against the postings set by Koch Industries, which is 
the largest gathering company in the US. Some traders have 
attempted to use prices issued by other companies such as Texaco, 
but these have not met with much success. Instead most traders 
establish their postings premium by looking at the differential 
between Koch's posting and the nearby Nymex WTI futures price. 
The differential represents the premium that the buyer will pay 
over the relevant postings price in the next month when the crude 
is delivered rateably and invoiced. 
Other modes of trading that have become increasingly popular 
are three to six-month mini-term deals known as strips. For 
example, a buyer might agree to purchase 1,500 b/d of a particular 
grade for three months with all the crude priced at the same 
differential to three concurrent months of WTI prices. Since strips 
reduce the need for spot trading, their growing popularity 
contributed to the declining liquidity of the key US pipeline marker 
crudes in the early 'nineties. 
Table 4.15 Key US domestic crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt b/d 
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) 40 0.40 450,000 
Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS) 36 0.40 650,000 
Heavy Louisana Sweet (HLS) 33 0.45 675,000 
West Texas Sour (WTS) 32 1.60 780,000 
Eugene Island 31 1.34 175,000 
Alaskan North Slope (ANS) Mars 
27 31 
1.06 2.00 
1,397,000 100,000* 
Source: Purvin & Gertz, Petroleum Supply Annual * capaczty 
WTI is also traded on a rateable basis for delivery at Midland, 
Texas. Midland is the junction where crude moving through 
pipelines from New Mexico and west Texas is either shipped north 
to Cushing or south to the Gulf coast. As a result, the differential 
between WTI at Midland and WTI at Cushing reflects the relative 
strength of demand from refiners in the mid-continent and those on 
the Gulf coast. In a balanced market, Cushing now trades at a 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.5/page 3

--- Page 188/964 ---
0.20 
Oil Trading Manual 
0.300.40 t 
-
5s 
& 
0.10 
0.00 
-0.10 L 
Jan-94 Jul-94 Jan-95 Jul-95 Jan-96 Jul-96 Jan-97 
’ource: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.7 The Cushing Cushion, WTI Cushin,g-WTI Midland 
premium of around 30 centsharrel to Midland reflecting the 
additional transport costs. During the summer months, peak 
demand from midcontinent refiners can exceed the capacity of the 
Midland to Cushing pipeline and the price of WTI at Cushing can 
rise sharply in what is known as the 'Cushing Cushion' (see Fig. 
4.7) -although increased pipeline capacity has alleviated this 
particular problem in recent years. But, despite the increased 
pipeline capacity, WTI still does not always move in step with other 
international marker crudes. Other US pipeline crudes, such as 
WTS and LLS, are all traded on a rateable basis. 
4.5.2 East coast 
The US east coast is highly dependent on crude imports as it is has 
little local production and is isolated from the domestic pipeline 
network. Most of the crude refined in the area is imported from the 
North Sea, West Africa, the Middle East and Latin America and 
purchased on an fob basis since the relatively small number of 
refiners means that there is no spot market for delivered crudes. 
Refineries are concentrated in the middle Atlantic states of 
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware and Virginia. 
4.5Ipage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 189/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
4.5.3 Gulf coast 
The Gulf coast is the biggest refining centre in the US. Stretching 
from Corpus Christi, Texas to Pascagoula, Mississippi, it consumes 
more than 7 million b/d of crude and draws its supplies both from 
imports and from domestic crude produced in Texas, Louisiana and 
the offshore fields. Offshore production from the Gulf of Mexico is 
increasing sharply as new deepwater fields are developed and could 
reach 1 million b/d by the end of the decade. Shell's 60,000 b/d 
Auger field came on stream in late 1994 and the 100,000 b/d Mars 
field, which is of similar quality to West Texas Sour and Arab 
Medium, started up in July 1996 and was producing around 80,000 
b/d by mid-1997. Gulf coast refineries are typically large and highly 
upgraded. Because of their size, coastal location and deep 
conversion capacity, most Gulf coast refiners have the flexibility to 
process a wide variety of imported crudes in addition to the full 
range of domestic pipeline crudes. As a result, active spot markets 
for both domestic and foreign crudes have developed in the area. 
The main domestic pipeline markets available to Gulf coast 
refiners are: 
0 Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS) based on St James, Louisiana, 
0 Heavy Louisiana Sweet (HLS) based on Empire, Louisiana, 
0 West Texas Intermediate (WTI) based on Midland, Texas, 
0 West Texas Sour (WTS) based on Midland, Texas. 
LLS is very similar in quality to imported sweet crudes from the 
North Sea and West Africa and provides a good barometer of both 
refinery demand and foreign crude availabilities on the US Gulf 
coast (see Fig. 4.8). In addition, the new offshore Mars crude (XX" 
API, yy per cent sulphur) is rising in prominence and some see it 
providing a possible benchmark for sour crudes in the future. 
Supplies of North Sea, West Afkican and Latin American 
crudes are usually available on a spot basis as US refiners prefer to 
hold low crude stocks and there is a ready market for short-haul 
supplies. The most common grades of sweet crude include North 
Sea Brent and Oseberg, Nigerian Bonny Light, Bonny Medium, 
Forcados, Brass River and Qua Iboe, Angolan Palanca and 
Cabinda, and Colombian Cusiana. Spot sales of sour crude are 
usually confined to Colombian Caiio Limon and Ecuadorean 
Oriente since tough resale restrictions are imposed by other major 
sour crude producers such as Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and Mexico. 
Prices for all imported crudes are linked -either directly or 
indirectly -to WTI quotations around the date of delivery. Some 
producers, like Mexico, actually use other pipeline grades, such as 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.5ipage 5

--- Page 190/964 ---
I 
Oil Trading Manual 
WTS - ANS cif -LLS - - - - - - - Bonny Lt o/t -- - - HLS Brent del USGC ~ 
-5.00 
Jan90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.8 US Gulf coast crudes minus WTI Cushin,g 
WTS or LLS in their pricing formulas rather than WTI (see section 
4.7.51, but these, in turn, are priced off WTI. Previously sour crudes 
were linked to ANS but the ANS market on the Gulf coast has 
completely dried up as most of this crude is delivered to the US 
west coast and can now be exported to the Far East. 
The 1.4 million b/d Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is the 
only deepwater port in the US capable of discharging VLCC sized 
vessels. As a result, the bulk of imported crude must be lightered to 
refiners from larger vessels located in international waters. Most of 
the lightering is concentrated off the upper Texas coast near 
Galveston, but extensive lightering operations also occur in the 
Gulf of Mexico near refineries located in Corpus Christi. On 
average, Gulf coast lightering costs under 30 centsharrel, but more 
stringent oil spill liability laws have reduced the pool of vessels 
available for lightering and costs are rising. 
LOOP throughputs have fallen steadily this decade as long-
haul producers make increasing use of Caribbean storage, allowing 
use of other ports with smaller vessels. The growing volumes of 
Latin American crudes are also transported on smaller vessels, 
some of which can discharge at Gulf coast ports. But throughputs 
are expected to rise in the future as output from a number of new 
offshore fields such as Mars will be linked by pipeline to LOOP. 
4.5Ipage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 191/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
4.5.4 Mid-continent 
The landlocked US mid-continent region can have a 
disproportionate impact on the world oil mxket through its 
influence on domestic crude prices, in particular WTI at Cushing, 
Oklahoma. Refiners in this region are entirely dependent on 
pipeline supplies for both domestic and imported crudes and during 
the peak summer season the local demand for crude can exceed the 
capacity of the pipeline system to deliver it. In both 1989 and 1994 
pipeline supply bottlenecks caused inland WTI prices at Cushing to 
increase sharply relative to domestic and imported crudes on the 
Gulf coast (see Fig. 4.8). US mid-continent refineries tend to be 
both smaller and less sophisticated than their Gulf coast 
counterparts. As a result, they have less flexibility over the grades 
they can process, typically preferring light sweet crudes. In 
addition, they often have only limited storage capacity since they 
are used to processing crude delivered on a rateable basis. 
But new pipeline capacity from both Canada and the US Gulf 
coast has reduced summer supply constraints at Cushing. 
Canadian crude is increasingly important to the US mid-continent, 
which has provided a ready-made market for the unexpectedly 
sharp rise in Canadian crude product.ion. 
4.5.5 West coast 
The US west coast crude market operates in almost complete 
isolation from other US refining centres. Its only link was the 
overflow of ANS supplies, which used to move to the Gulf coast, but 
shipments have virtually ceased. West coast refiners have extensive 
upgrading and de-sulphurisation capacity and run a slate that 
consists mainly of ANS, local Californian heavy crudes, and some 
Canadian crude. Other crude imports are limited and consist 
mainly of lighter, low sulphur crudes from the Far East. But 
imports have increased now that Alaskan crude can be exported 
and US west coast refiners are running more south American 
crude, for example, Ecuadorian Oriente, Argentinian Canadon Seco 
or Colombian Cafio Limon. 
ANS plays a dominant role in the west coast spot market, but 
most of the marginal supplies are typically in the hands of one 
company, BP, which owns the largest ANS share of production but 
now has no local refinery capacity. As a result, ANS prices can 
change abruptly relative to WTI particularly at the end of a 
delivery month (see Fig. 4.9). In the spot market, ANS is priced at a 
discount to WTI, either on an outturn cargo basis or on a pipeline 
basis. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.5fpage 7

--- Page 192/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
1 00 -
-Line 63 
~ ANS cif 
-6.00 -
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 
I I 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.9 US west coast crudes minus WTI Cushing 
Local Californian crudes are typically traded on a postings 
related basis. The most common arrangement employs the average 
of the price postings made by Chevron, Mobil, Union, and Texaco 
(CMUT). The most actively traded grade used to be Line 63, a 
heavy sour crude blended from crudes taken from California's San 
Joaquin Valley, including light crude from the US Naval Reserve 
Elk Hills field, and the federally-owned offshore Outer Continental 
Shelf (OCS). But liquidity has declined since an earthquake 
destroyed another pipeline -the 50,000 b/d Line One -in early 
1994, which meant that Line 63 throughputs have had to be pro-
rated because of the capacity shortage, reducing the amount of 
crude available for spot trading in the Los Angeles area. Although 
its characteristics are similar to ANS, it still trades at a significant 
discount to ANS. Other commonly traded local crudes include 17" 
AF'I Thums usually quoted cif Los Angeles, 13" AF'I Kern River 
usually quoted on an fob basis, 13" AF'I San Joaquin Valley (SJV) 
Heavy, and the heavy OCS blend. 
4.5Ipage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 193/964 ---
4.6 Middle East 
The seven countries surrounding the Gulf produce nearly a third of 
the worlds crude and control most of the spare production capacity 
available to the world oil market (see Table 4.16). Six of the seven 
Gulf producers -Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar and the 
United Arab Emirates -are members of Opec, but Oman is not 
and generally produces at or close to full capacity. Saudi Arabia is 
the most important in terms of reserves, capacity and output, but 
the combined output of the other Gulf producers is even greater 
and their output decisions can also have a significant impact on oil 
prices. The Yemen, located outside the Gulf on the southern edge of 
the Arabian peninsula, is also a significant regional crude exporter. 
Gulf exports rose sharply in 1997 with the start of limited oil sales 
by Iraq. 
Table 4.16 Middle East crude production and exports, 1996 
Country Production Exports Capacity? 
bld b/d b/d 
Saudi Arabia+ 8,040,000 6,300,000 10,000,000 
Iran 3,675,000 2,5uo,oua 3,900,UOO 
Iraq" 630,000 na na 
Kuw ait$ 2,055,000 1,100,000 2,500,000 
Oman 875,000 820,000 900,000 
Qatar 480,000 420,000 530,000 
United Arab Emirates 2,205,000 2,100,000 2,550,000 
Yemen 360,000 295,000 385,000 
$ includes 50 per cent share of Neutral Zone end year 
Iraq begun limited oil exports in December 1996 
Most Gulf crude is sold on a term basis, partly because of the 
time required to ship oil to refineries in the United States, Europe, 
and the Far East, and partly because major Opec producers such as 
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are reluctant to see their crude being 
traded on the spot market and term contracts usually prohibit the 
secondary trading of Gulf crudes. Only about 3 per cent of Gulf 
crude is sold spot, either by equity producers in Oman, Abu Dhabi 
and Qatar or by those term contract holders able to do so, and this 
provides the basis of a fairly active regional spot and forward paper 
market. In 1996, strong demand fi-om Asian refiners and rising oil 
prices boosted the volume of spot trade in Gulf crudes by more than 
40 per cent. However, despite the Gulf producers' dislike of spot 
trading, most crude sold on term contracts is priced using a formula 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6fpage 1

--- Page 194/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
linked to spot price assessments for marker crudes such as WTI, 
Brent, Oman and Dubai (see Appendix 4.2). Saudi Arabia, Iran, 
and Kuwait all use formula pricing mechanisms, as did Iraq before 
exports ceased in August 1990. But Abu Dhabi, Oman and Qatar 
set official prices retroactively. Iraq now uses a formula set by the 
UN but linked to Saudi crude prices. 
4.6.1 Saudi Arabia 
Saudi Arabia produces an average of 8 million b/d of crude oil in 
line with its Opec quota, but monthly output volumes vary 
seasonally because associated gas is used for electricity gener at'ion. 
About 2 million b/d of Saudi Arabia's 10 million b/d capacity are 
unused. All crude in Saudi Arabia is produced by state oil company 
Saudi Aramco (see Table 4.17). Lighter grades tend to come from 
onshore fields particularly the giant Ghawar, and heavier ones 
from offshore fields such as Zuluf and Safaniya. Saudi Aramco 
started production of the new Arab Super Light, of far higher 
quality than other grades, in the second half of 1994, at 200,000 b/d 
but output has fallen to around 180,000 b/d because of low reservoir 
pressure in the Hawtah field and plans for further expansion have 
been shelved. Saudi Arabia also has a half share of output from the 
Neutral Zone on the border with Kuwait, which now totals around 
525,000 b/d. Production is by Texaco (225,000 b/d) onshore and 
Japan's Arabian Oil Company (300,000 b/d) offshore. 
Table 4.17 Saudi Arabian export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %,wt b/d 
Arab Super Light* 50 0.60 180,000 
Berri (or Extra Light) 39 1.20 1,000,000 
Arab Light 34 1.80 5,000,000 
Arab Medium 31 2.40 1,100,000 
Arab Heavy 27 2.90 500,000 
*production started in mid-1994 
Since the start of 1994, Saudi Aramco has implement.ed a 
policy of maximising sales of lighter grades (Arab Light and Extra 
Light) at the expense of heavier ones (Arab Heavy and Medium). 
This was done by cutting availabilities of incremental volumes for 
heavy crude and narrowing the differential between light and 
heavy prices. The new 500,000 b/d Shaybah field is expected 
onstream in mid-1998 and its light (41.5" API) low sulphur crude 
will be blended with Arab Extra Light (Berri). 
4.6lpage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 195/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Roughly 1million b/d is consumed locally and the rest exported 
(some in the form of products). Saudi Arabia exports around 6 
million b/d of crude. Sales to North America have declined in recent 
years to about 20 per cent of the total. Eastern buyers now take 
around 50 per cent of Saudi exports and Europe around 25 per cent. 
Saudi Arabia provides the majority of crude used by its three 
international refining joint ventures, Star Enterprise in the US, 
Ssangyong in South Korea and Petron in the Philippines. 
Saudi crude prices are determined by three main regional 
formulas, covering lifters in the east, US and Europe (see Appendix 
4.2). Eastern prices are based on a premium or discount to average 
Oman and Dubai spot quotations during the month of loading, fob 
Ras Tanura. US prices switched from using ANS in January 1994 
and are now based on WTI: fob Ras Tanura. Formulas involve a 
discount to spot assessments of WTI calculated over a five day 
period, 50 days after loading. There is also a less widely used 
formula for delivered sales into the US. The European formula 
involves a discount to dated Brent spot assessments in a five day 
period, 40 days after loading, fob Ras Tanura. There is also a 
separate formula for Mediterranean lifters fob Sidi Kerir, but 
changes to this are usually in line with the main European 
formula. 
The formulas are issued in the first week of the month before 
loading. Nominations are then finalised mid-month. In addition to 
term volumes, lifters can request incremental barrels. Spot sales 
are banned, with destination restrictions enforced. 
4.6.2 Iran 
All Iranian crude is produced and sold by the state National 
Iranian Oil Company (NIOC). Around 550,000 b/d comes from 
offshore fields, rebuilt after heavy damage in the 1980-88 war with 
Iraq, and the rest onshore. Output in 1996 averaged 3.7 million bid, 
just under Iran's total capacity of 3.9 million b/d. Plans to expand 
Iran's capacity to 4.5 million b/d have been hampered by US 
sanctions which have made it difficult to obtain oil field equipment 
and spares. Iran is also finding more gas and condensate than oil 
and recently cut its oil reserve estimates. But further repairs and 
expansions to offshore fields are expected to raise capacity over the 
next few years. 
Iran has two main export grades, Iranian Heavy and Light, 
which account for over 90 per cent of the total (see Table 4.18). 
With domestic consumption of around 1.1 million b/d, Iranian 
exports average around 2.5 million b/d. Iranian Heavy exports vary 
from 1.4 million b/d to 1.6 million b/d, and Light from 900,000 b/d to 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6fpage 3

--- Page 196/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
1.1 million b/d. Other grades include around 120,000 b/d of Lavan 
Blend and smaller volumes of Foroozan Blend and Sirri. 
Tuble 4.18 Iranian export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bld 
Iran I,ight 34 1.40 1,400,000 
Iran Heavy 31 1.70 2,000,000 
Iavan Blend 34 1.80 120,000 
NIOC has different policies for eastern and western sales. All 
eastern sales are on a term basis. Prices are linked to averages of 
spot Oman and Dubai quotes during the month of loading. Iranian 
Light is priced at a differential to spot Oman and Iranian Heavy to 
Dubai (see Appendix 4.2). Formulas are set quarterly but can be 
renegotiated if the level of comparable crudes -particularly Saudi 
Arabia's Arab Medium and Light -changes significantly. The 
formula protects against sharp swings in the value of Iranian crude 
against Oman and Dubai through an Automatic Adjustment Factor 
(AAF).
 This involves a fixed differential of 77 centsharrel between 
Oman and Dubai. The actual differential between Oman and Dubai 
is then subtracted from this, and the result divided by two, giving 
an AAF. The AAF is then subtracted from the Iranian Heavy price 
and added to the Iranian Light price. 
Westbound sales are looser. Term contracts -running 
between three months and a year have a framework volume, and ~ 
actual amounts can vary considerably from month to month. In 
addition, around one fifth of western sales are spot. Prices are 
negotiated with each lifter, based on a differential to dated Brent 
assessments on five days around bill of lading. Eastern sales and 
most western ones are fob Kharg Island. However, NIOC also sells 
on a delivered basis, using tankers brought round the Cape or 
storage in Rotterdam and Le Havre. In 1994, NIOC started using 
the Sumed pipeline across Egypt, selling from the northern 
terminal of Sidi Kerir to Mediterranean end users. 
Spot trade in Iranian crude has traditionally been active in the 
Mediterranean and northwest Europe, based on a differential to 
dated Brent fob Sidi Kerir or on a delivered basis (see Section 
4.3.6). However, volumes available for traders have fallen since 
1994, undermining market activity. NIOC exerts close control over 
spot activity, insisting on observation of destination specifications, 
asking traders to sell spot cargoes to end-users not other traders, 
and introducing new terms such as restrictions on sales into public 
tenders. As a result, spot trade tends to be secretive and illiquid. 
4.Wpage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 197/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Up to 600:OOO b/d of Iranian crude flows through Sumed, but only 
about 100,000 b/d is sold spot. 
Around 900,000 bid of Iranian exports goes to the east, with 
Japan taking 400,000 bid to 500,000 bid and South Korea around 
230,000 bid. The remaining 1.6 million b/d goes to the west. US 
companies are now prohibited from purchasing Iranian crude for 
use anywhere in the world following the extension of sanctions to 
the foreign subsidiaries of US companies in June 1995. But discreet 
marketing by NIOC has succeeded in placing most of the former 
400,000 bid sales to US companies with European refiners. NIOC 
also sells over 250,000 bid to South Africa and 60,000 b/d to Brazil. 
Iran also has a 40,000 b/d exchange deal with Kazakstan in 
which Kazakstan lifts Iran Light in return for a blend of Kazak 
crudes delivered to refineries in the north of Iran. 
4.6.3 Iraq 
Iraq is currently exporting 600-700,000 bid of crude under the 
terms of the UN oil-for-aid deal. Iraq was unable to export crude 
for sale on the international market for more than six years. 
Following the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990, the 
United Nations imposed trade sanctions banning oil exports. The 
trade ban was followed by further UN Resolutions during the Iraqi 
occupation and after the Gulf War which set out the terms under 
which Iraq will be allowed to export oil again. But the Iraqi regime 
under Saddam Hussein has so far failed to comply with the UN 
terms. Some now believe that the US is unlikely to agree to lift 
sanctions against Iraqi oil exports as long as Saddam Hussein 
remains in power, even if he unexpectedly changes his position and 
complies with all the UN Resolutions. 
But Iraq finally accepted the terms of UN Resolution 986 -
which allow for the limited export of Iraqi oil to pay for 
humanitarian aid within Iraq -in 1986 and began exports in 
December. The agreement enables Iraq to sell up to $1billion worth 
of oil every 90 days for an initial period of 180 days, which is 
equivalent to 600-700,000 b/d of crude depending on market prices. 
Each transaction has to be approved by the UN sanctions 
committee and 26 companies have now signed term contracts. 
About 360,000 b/d of Kirkuk is being sold fob the Mediterranean 
port of Ceyhan and the about 300,000 b/d of Basrah Light fob Mina 
al-Bakr in the Gulf. Kirkuk sales to Europe are priced at a 
differential to dated Brent and Kirkuk and Basrah Light sales to 
the US are priced at a differential to spot WTI. Basrah Light sales 
to the Asia-Pacific are priced at a differential to the average of 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6lpage 5

--- Page 198/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
1.00 
0.00 
-1.oo -
5$ 
-2.00 
& 
-3.00 
-4.00 
-5.00 
-6.00 
Jan90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.10 Mideast Gulf crudes minus dated Bren,t 
Oman and Dubai and closely track Saudi prices. The price 
differentials used in the formulas are also controlled by the UN. 
Table 4.19 Iraqi crudes, 1995 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API Yowt bld 
Basrah Light 34 2.10 340,000 
Kirkuk 36 2.00 250,000 
Fao Blcnd 28 3.50 na 
Before the invasion of Kuwait, Iraq was producing 3 million 
b/d of crude oil, 1.5 million b/d of which was being exported, mainly 
through government-to-government deals in exchange for 
armaments. The majority of Iraqi crude exports were from Ceyhan 
(1 million b/d) with the remainder going by sea from the Gulf port 
of Mina a1 Bakr or via the IPSA pipeline through Saudi Arabia to 
the Red Sea. Iraq produces two grades of light crude oil, Basrah 
Light and Kirkuk, and a heavy sour crude, Fao Blend, that 
originally started production at the end of 1989 (see Table 4.19). 
4.6.4 Kuwait 
Kuwait has a single blended export crude, Kuwait Export. Plans to 
separate a lighter stream (37"AF'I to 4O"AF'I) were prepared in the 
4.Wpage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 199/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
1980s but were set back by the Gulf crisis. Average production in 
1996 was just over 2 million b/d in line with Kuwait's Opec quota, 
leaving some 500,000 b/d of spare capacity shut in. Reconstruction 
of Kuwait's damaged facilities is now- vktually complete and there 
are plans to expand upstream capacity to 3 million b/d by 2005. 
Kuwait's output includes its half share of the 525,000 b/d Neutral 
Zone. 
All Kuwait's crude is sold on term contracts. About 900,000 b/d 
is refined locally leaving 1.1 million b/d for export. In 1996, 600,000 
b/d went to Asia-Pacific refiners, 210,000 b/d to the US, 195,000 b/d 
to Europe and 90,000 b/d to South Africa. Pricing is linked to Saudi 
Arabia's formula for Arab Medium, which is of similar quality. It 
has traditionally been set at a discount of 10 centsharrel to 15 
centsharrel, but good demand in the west has allowed Kuwait to 
raise this to parity (see Appendix 4.2). Eastern sales remain at a 
discount. Kuwait stopped basing US sales on the Avab Medium 
formula in the second half of 1993 using a basket of ANS, WTI and 
WTS instead, but restored its policy in January 1994 after Saudi 
Arabia switched from ANS to WTI. 
State Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC) produces all crude 
in Kuwait, although the government is considering opening border 
areas to foreign exploration. Production from the Neutral Zone is 
shared with Saudi Arabia (see above). 
Immediately after the Gulf War, Kuwait concentrated on sales 
to the east but later built up solid markets in the US and Europe. 
Restoration of Kuwait's large refining sector means that around 
900,000 b/d is processed and used locally or exported as products. 
KPC subsidiary Kuwait Petroleum International already has a 
well established refining and retail network in Europe, but is now 
redirecting its efforts towards the rapidly growing Asia-Pacific 
region. KPI closed its 100,000 b/d Naples refinery in late 1993 and 
recently shut down its 56,500 b/d Danish refinery. It still operates a 
75,500 b/d refinery in Rotterdam and has purchased a 50 per cent 
shareholding in Agip's 300,000 b/d Milazzo refinery. KPI sells 
250,000 b/d of products in the European market and plans to have 
300-350,000 b/d of refinery capacity. 
4.6.5 Oman 
Oman produces 900,000 b/d of crude and plans to increase capacity 
to 1million b/d by 2000. There is a single Oman export blend, a 
light crude (36"API) with a low (0.8 per centj sulphur content. 
Production is dominated by Petroleum Development Oman (PDO) 
whose shareholders are the government (60 per centj, Shell (34 per 
cent), Total (4 per cent) and Partex (2 per cent). PDO accounted for 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6fpage 7

--- Page 200/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
about 825,000 b/d of 1996 production of 875,000 b/d. A handful of 
independents also produce in Oman, the biggest being Occidental at 
50,000 b/d. Small volumes of crude or condensate are produced by 
Elf, Japex and Canada's IPC. 
Oman prices are set retroactively at the end of each month by 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Minerals (MPM), based on the 
government's assessment of market conditions and comments from 
from lifters (see Appendix 4.1). The Oman price is set at a premium 
to spot assessments of first month Dubai during the month in 
question, although this is not formally acknowledged by the 
ministry. Contracts are negotiated every six months, from J,muary 
or July. Equity sellers negotiate their own contracts, which are set 
at fixed premiums to the MPM price. 
Oman exports around 820,000 b/d, with sales dominated by 
eastern end users. Oman crude is also attractive to US west coast 
refiners because of its good yield of light products and demand may 
increase further now that the ANS export ban has been lifted. 
There is an active spot market in Oman (see Fig. 4.101, partly 
because of the extent of foreign participation, although this involves 
cargoes (500,000 barrels each) from both the government and 
equity holders, particularly Shell. The government issued a 
statement in mid-1994 warning lifters against the resale of cargoes. 
However, this was not enforced and spot trade continued. Deals are 
done at a premium or discount to the MPM price, which is not 
known at the time of the transaction. 
4.6.6 Qatar 
Qatar produces 550,000 b/d of crude oil, well above its Opec quota 
of 378,000 b/d. State Qatar General Petroleum Corporation (QGPC) 
produces around 470,000 b/d -270,000 b/d from the onshore 
Dukhan field and the rest from the offshore Bul Hanine, Maydan 
Mahzam, Idd al-Shargi, al-Shaheen, al-Rayyan and al-Khaleej 
fields. But the offshore sector is open to foreign participation and 
foreign companies have been allowed to maximise output without 
constraint, pushing Qatar's total production up in recent years. 
Qatar also produces growing volumes of condensate; production 
doubled to 60,000 b/d in October 1996 as the Qatargas LNG project 
came onstream. 
Occidental is the main foreign producer, boosting output from 
the Idd al-Shargi field to 65,000 b/d from under 20,000 b/d in 1994. 
Other foreign producers are: Maersk, which produced 30,000 b/d 
from its al-Shaheen field in 1995; Arco, which started production 
from its 30,000 b/d al-Rayyan field in November 1996; and Elf and 
Agip which brought the 30,000 b/d al-Khaleej field on stream in 
4.6Ipage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 201/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
March 1997. Qatar has now boosted its capacity target to 700,000 
bld by the year 2000. 
Qatar has two main export grades: Qatar Land (Dukhan) and 
Qatar Marine (see Table 4.20). Retroactive prices are set each 
month by QGPC, determined as a variable premium to the Omani 
MPM price (see Appendix 4.1). Qatar Land is more expensive than 
Marine, but the width of the differential varies on market 
conditions. Both grades are traded on the spot market, but less 
actively than Omani and UAE crude. Foreign producers also sell 
cargoes of al-Shaheen (30" API, 1.9 per cent sulphur), al-Rayyan 
(25" API, 3 per cent sulphur), and al-Khaleej (28' API, 2 per cent 
sulphur). The heavy al-Rayyan uses Saudi Arab Heavy as a 
benchmark, while al-Khlaleej has been sold by Maersk at a 
differential to Dubai. 
Table 4.20 Qatari export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity 
"AAPI Sulphur 
70wt Production 
b/d 
Qatar 1,and (Ihkhan) 42 1.30 270,000 
Qatar Marine 35 1.W 20~.U00 
Around 60,000 b/d of output is refined locally at Umm Said, 
leaving the rest for export. Most sales are to the east, although 
some go west, for example to Brazil. 
4.6.7 United Arab Emirates 
The UAE's main producer is Abu Dhabi, which accounted for 
around 1.9 million bld of the total UAE production of 2.2 million bid 
in 1996 (see Table 4.21). Foreign companies hold equity stakes in 
all production. Output from Dubai is falling and dropped to only 
250,000 bld by the end of 1996. Dubai crude, however, remains an 
important regional marker grade and is used, together with Oman, 
in many of the Arab Gulf pricing formulas. Another emirate, 
Sharjah also produces 5,000 bld fi-om the Mubarak field operated by 
Crescent Petroluem. 
Abu Dhabi 
The main Abu Dhabi export grade is Murban, produced 
onshore from five main fields by Abu Dhabi Company for Onshore 
Oil Operations (Adco). Its shareholders are Adnoc (60 per centj, BP 
(9.5 per cent), Shell (9.5 per cent), Total (9.5 per centj, Exxon (4.75 
per cent), Mobil (4.75 per cent) and Partex (2 per centj. Adco now 
has capacity of nearly 1.2 million b/d, but is unable to use more 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6fpage 9

--- Page 202/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
than 900,000 b/d because the UAE adheres to its Opec quota. Abu 
Dhabi also produces 130,000 b/d of Thamama condensate. 
Abu Dhabi Marine Operating Company (Adma-Opco) produces 
from the offshore Lower Zakum and Umm Shaif fields. Its 
shareholders are Adnoc (60 per cent), BP (14.66 per cent), Total 
(13.33 per cent) and Japan's Jodco (12 per cent). Adma-Opco has 
capacity of around 500,000 b/d, with plans to raise it to 600,000 b/d 
by the end of the decade. In 1996 production rose to 440,000 b/d as 
output from the Upper Zakum field reached a plateau. 
Ta,ble 4.21 United Arab Em,imtes export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bld 
Ahu Dhahi 
Murban 40 0.8 900,000 
Lower Zakum 40 1.1 200,000 
Upper Xakum 3 4 1.8 500,000 
Abu al-Bakhoosh (ABK) 32 1.9 45,000 
Umm Shaif 37 1.5 220,000 
Dubai 
Llubai 31 2.0 285.000 
Zakum Development Company (Zadco), produces from the 
offshore Upper Zakum field, and comprises just Adnoc (88 per cent) 
and Jodco (12 per cent). Its capacity has risen quickly, from 330,000 
b/d in 1993 to 500,000 b/d by 1995, but plans to expand to 600,000 
b/d have been shelved because of high costs. Because of the heavy 
investment, Adnoc has allowed Zadco to produce at capacity since 
1995, reining in the other main producers to keep the UAE total 
close to its Opec quota. 
Other operators produce around 80,000 b/d offshore. The main 
one is Abu al-Bukhoosh on the maritime border with Iran, operated 
by Total. It produces around 45,000 b/d of ABK crude. 
Like Oman, Adnoc sets retroactive prices at the end of each 
month for its crudes: Murban, Lower Zakum, Umm Shaif and 
Upper Zakum (see Appendix 4.1). Foreign equity partners negotiate 
their own term contracts, but use pricing based on a premium to 
the official Adnoc price. Adnoc does not conduct spot trade in its 
share of production, enforcing destination restrictions on its 
cargoes. However, a sizeable spot market is supported by the 
foreign partners' share, with Murban the most active, followed by 
Lower Zakum and Umm Shaif (see Fig. 4.10). Cargoes (500,000 
barrels) are traded at a premium or discount to the Adnoc price. 
Upper Zakum is traded only occasionally on the spot market, 
4.Wpage 10 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 203/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
because of the dominant Adnoc shareholding. Spot cargoes of ABK 
are traded from time to time, but with prices based on the official 
MPM not Adnoc price, as it is closer t.0 Oman in quality. 
Adnoc's share of 1996 Abu Dhabi output was just over 1.2 
million b/d, with foreign partners at about 640,000 b/d. Around 80 
per cent of Adnoc's term sales are to the east, its light grades 
particularly popular in Japan. Smaller volumes move west to Africa 
and Europe. 
Dubai Dubai crude comes from 
 four offshore fields, Fateh, SW Fateh, 
Falah and Rashid. Its reserves are officially 4 billion barrels but 
there are doubts as to whether this is all recoverable. Exports are 
from the offshore Fateh terminal, with a standard cargo size of 
500,000 barrels. 
Dubai production is operated by Conoco, with a 30 per cent 
stake in the consortium. The other shareholders are Total (30 per 
cent), Repsol (25 per cent), Germany's DEA-RWE (10 per cent) and 
Wintershall (5 per cent). Output peaked at 420,000 b/d in 1991 but 
the ageing reservoirs are now in decline. New wells gave temporary 
support in the spring of 1994, but the level fell back towards 
300,000 b/d late in the year and had dropped to only 260,000 b/d by 
early 1997. Production is expected to fall to below 170,000 b/d by 
1999. The prospects for future Dubai production are bleak now that 
Conoco has been forced to drop plans for a gas injection project 
using gas from Iran's offshore Sirri field because of US sanctions. 
At current production levels, between 15 and 16 cargoes load 
each month, but traders say that the market will be too illiquid 
when output drops to the equivalent of 10 cargoes in 1999. Some 
Dubai cargoes are sold on a term basis by equity holders, but there 
is also an active spot market. This led to its emergence as a marker 
crude for other Gulf exporters in the 1980s. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait 
and Iran use Dubai and Oman in their eastern sales formulas, 
while Oman uses Dubai in establishing its monthly official price. 
Dubai has the most active forward market in the Gulf with 
trade in both intermonth and Brent/Dubai spreads, which 
developed in the late 1980s (see Chapter 7). However, this is small 
compared with Brent and diminished during the Gulf crisis and 
with the decline in production. Companies buy and sell paper 
contracts up to one year ahead of the loading month. As the loading 
month approaches, speculative traders will usually have balanced 
their sales and purchases of paper contracts. Only those actually 
wanting a physical cargo will remain with open positions. Once the 
loading programme is released, cargo dates are passed down the 
'daisy chain' of paper transactions by companies with balanced 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6ipage 11

--- Page 204/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
positions who have not booked out. At the end of the chain is the 
company with an open position, which takes delivery of the actual 
cargo. 
The market is governed by General Terms and Conditions 
(GT+Cs) drawn up by operator Conoco. Previous loose regulations 
for the passage of dates resulted in problems and disputes, but 
these have been tightened up in new GT+Cs introduced for loadings 
from May 1994. Each trader now only has one hour to pass on 
dates, with the process limited to two business days. In contrast to 
Brent, there is very little trade once dates are allocated to a cargo. 
The new GT+Cs helped provide some support to market 
liquidity and trading volumes have recovered despite the declining 
output. The market remains dominated by a handful of companies, 
including equity sellers Conoco, Total and Repsol, oil majors BP 
and Caltex, and traders Phibro, J. Aron, Morgan Stanley and J.P. 
Morgan. The biggest buyer is still the Indian Oil Corpor at'ion 
through its monthly import tenders -although purchases were 
nearly halved in 1995 as IOC sought alternative supplies -and its 
decisions can have a fundamental impact on the market's 
performance. There is also a growing market in Dubai swaps which 
do not require physical delivery. 
4.6.8 Yemen 
Oil production in the Yemen has risen sharply as new fields were 
brought on stream following the end of the civil war, and has now 
reached 385,000 b/d. Yemen exports two grades of crude oil, Marib 
Light and Masila (see Table 4.22). The Marib/Jawf field is operated 
by Hunt Petroleum and the Masila field is operated by Canadian 
Occidental. Saudi Nimir Petroleum has re-started output from 
Shabwa Block 4 but now produces less than 2,000 b/d. Hunt's 
Hleiwa field in Jannah Block 5 came onstream in October 1996 and 
is currently producing 25,000 b/d; output is expected to rise to 
75,000 b/d by 1998. Jannah output is blended into the Marib Light 
export blend. The Yemen government has a stake in the production 
from all fields and remains a substantial seller of Yemeni crudes. 
About 65,000 b/d of Marib Light is usually processed at the Aden 
and Marib refineries to meet local demand. 
Table 4.22 Yemeni export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bld 
Marib Light" 48.0 0.1 175,000 
Masila 30.5 0.6 180,000 
4.Wpage 12 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 205/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Official prices for Yemeni crudes are set in advance on a 
quarterly basis. Masila has proved popular as a low sulphur 
alternative to Oman since production began in the middle of 1993, 
particularly in areas such as South Korea with limited 
desulphurisation capacity. It also benefits from pricing against 
dated Brent: which is seen as cheap relative to other Middle East 
sour crudes. Interest in Marib Light has waned since 1994 as the 
crude stream now contains 30,000 b/d of condensate, which has 
raised its gravity from 41" to 48" API. Marib Light sales are linked 
to dated Brent. Masila sales by the government are also tied to 
Brent. Canadian Occidental offers an alternative linkage to a 
basket of Oman's official (MPM) price, dated Brent and front month 
Dubai, although recent sales have been linked to the Yemen 
government's OSP. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.6Ipage 13

--- Page 206/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 207/964 ---
4.7 Asia Pacific 
Countries in the Asia Pacific region and Australia produce about 6 
million b/d or a tenth of world oil production. The main crude 
producers are China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia, Thailand, 
Brunei, Vietnam and New Zealand (see Table 4.23). Recent 
additions include Papua New Guinea and the Philippines, both of 
which began producing in mid-1992. But only four of the eight 
major producers in the region -Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia 
and Papua New Guinea -are significant exporters, and it is 
therefore crudes from these countries which are most frequently 
traded. 
Table 4.23 Far East crude production and exports, 2996 
Country Production Exports Capacity? 
btd b/d b/d 
Australia'" 536,000 220,000 620,000 
Brunei 150,000 140,000 160,000 
China 3,120,000 320,000 3,200,000 
Indonesia 1,380,000 800,000 1,400,000 
Malaysia:'- 716,000 370,000 730,000 
Papua New Guinea 110,000 110,000 110,000 
Vietnam 150,000 100,000 150,000 
’+ including condensates T end year 
Asia Pacific crudes encompass a wide range of properties. 
Their gravities range from 20"AF'I to 45"API and above. But with 
the exception of some Chinese ciudes, they all have a particularly 
low sulphur content. Few gvades, even the heavy Indonesian crudes 
like Duri, contain more than 0.2 per cent sulphur by weight. 
The majority of Asia Pacific crudes are traded on the basis of 
the Asian Petroleum Price Index (APPI), which is now published 
twice a week in a bid to improve the accuracy of the price 
assessments. Unlike the independent price assessments published 
by Petroleum Argus or PZatt’s, the APPI is based on estimates of 
market prices for twenty regional grades of crude oil (see Table 
4.24) supplied to the accounting firm Peat Marwick in Hong Kong 
by a panel of local producers, end-users and traders some of whom 
may hold positions in the crudes they are assessing. Participating 
companies submit their assessments to Peat Marwick for 
publication on Tuesday and Thursday. Any contributions that are 
too high or too low compared with the rest are discarded and the 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.7ipage 1

--- Page 208/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
remainder are processed to give a 10 centsharrel spread for each 
crude. Assessments are supposed to reflect the spot market price for 
the specific crude loading in the time period for which the 
assessment is being made. The APPI for Tapis is the most widely 
used price marker in the region, providing a benchmark for 900,000 
bld of light sweet crudes. 
Table 4.24 Crudes assessed b.y APPI 
Indonesia: Arun Condensate, Attaka, Belida, Ardjuna, Minas, 
Widuri, Cinta, Duri 
Ma1 aysi a: Tapi x 
Australia: Gippsland, NW Shelr Condensate, Cossack 
Papua New Guinea: Kutuhu Tight 
China: Daying 
Mid-east Gulf: Oman, Arab light, Murban, Ihbai, Arab Heavy 
But the role of APPI Tapis as a marker has been repeatedly 
criticised. Although Tapis is the largest light crude stream in Asia 
with output of 360,000 b/d, only small volumes are now sold spot 
making the market relatively illiquid. Increased refinery capacity 
in Malaysia has restricted the amount of Tapis being exported and 
only around four 500,000 bare1 cargoes are sold on the spot market 
each month. Over the past few years, the volume of spot trade in 
Tapis has nearly halved, leading to accusations that the price is 
3.00 
1.00 
-
a,2 -1.009
69 
-3.00 
-Mlnas 
-5.00 
-7.00 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.11 Asia Pacific crudes minus dated Brent 
4.7lpage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 209/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
being inflated by a small group of buyers who are prepared to pay a 
premium for familiarity. 
Crude prices in the Asia Pacific region often appear to move 
erratically compared with other international markets such as 
Brent, Dubai and WTI (see Fig. 4.11). There are three reasons for 
this. First, Asia Pacific crude prices are determined by a small spot 
market which is primarily influenced by regional supply and 
demand factors, in particular Japanese power utilities and seasonal 
distillate demand. Secondly, there is an inter-relationship between 
the prices for Indonesian and Malaysian crudes since both Minas 
and Tapis are used in the Indonesian Crude Price (ICP) formula, 
even though the markets for the two crudes are very different. And 
thirdly; there is a time lag built into the ICP formula which 
perpetuates the effect of a strong or weak market on regional 
prices. As a result, some regional light sweet crude producers are 
keen to use Brent as a price marker. With increasing volumes of 
Brent-related west African crude now moving east and the IPE 
Brent futures contract being traded on the Singapore International 
Monetary Exchange (Simex), Brent’s influence is gaining ground in 
the Asia Pacific market. 
4.7.1 Indonesia 
Indonesia produces about 30 different crude streams all of which 
have a low sulphur content. Although over half the crude streams 
are light, with gravities higher than 34”API, these are only 
produced in small quantities. Medium to heavy waxy crudes, 
principally Minas, account for about half of Indonesia’s production 
(see Table 4.25). Production is falling as Indonesia continues to find 
more gas than oil and foreign companies find that upstream terms 
are better in other countries. The last major find was the Belida 
field in 1992 which now produces 120,000 b/d of light sweet crude 
oil. 
The ownership of Indonesian crude is divided between the 
government and equity producers who have production sharing 
contracts. The main equity producers are Caltex (Minas and Duri), 
Maxus (Cinta and Widuri), and Mobil and Unocal (Attaka). The 
state oil company, Pertamina, handles about 85 per cent of the 
crude oil produced, selling through its regional affiliates, Korea 
Indonesia Petroleum Company (KIPCO), Perta Oil, Indoil and 
Pacific Petroleum. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.7lpage 3

--- Page 210/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Tuble 4.25 Indonesian export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API 70wt bld 
Kalimantan 
Handil 33 0.10 60,000 
Attwka 42 0.09 47,000 
Eadak 41 0.08 42,000 
Sumatra 
Minas 34 0.09 470,000 
Arun Condensate 54 0.00 40,000 
Duri 21 0.19 226,000 
Java Sea 
Widuri 33 0.08 90,000 
Ardjunw 37 0.09 120,000 
Eelida 44 0.10 120,000 
Cinta 33 0.12 60,000 
Indonesia exports about 800,000 b/d of its 1.6 million b/d 
production of crude and condensate. Over half of this goes to Japrul, 
while Australasia, Korea, Taiwan and China take 5-10 per cent 
each. Because the sulphur content of Indonesian crudes is so low 
they can be burnt directly in Japanese power stations. But rapid 
growth in oil consumption is expected to reduce the volume of oil 
available for export to around 400,000 by the year 2000 at which 
point Indonesia could become a net oil importer. 
Official selling prices for Indonesian crudes (ICPs) are issued 
monthly in arrears by Pertamina. The prices were originally 
calculated using only APPI spot market assessments according to a 
published formula which, though complicated, is predictable. But 
this was not sufficiently responsive to spot price movements and 
Pertamina now use an average of the APPI ICP formula and spot 
price assessments published by Platt’s and RIM. 
The Indonesian crude price formula is calculated in two parts: 
First, the prices of five basket crudes (Oman, Dubai, Minas, 
Tapis and Gippsland) published by APPI during the 
delivery month are averaged to form the monthly basket 
price. Although APPI assessments now appear bi-weekly, 
Indonesia will continue to use a weekly average in its ICP 
formula. As there are five crudes involved, the monthly 
basket price is an average of either 20 or 25 numbers 
depending on the month. 
Secondly, a premium or discount to the basket price is 
calculated for each grade of Indonesian crude. In order to 
4.7lpage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 211/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
minimise the impact of short-term market fluctuations this 
is based on 52 weeks of data up to and including the last 
assessment published in the month prior to the delivery 
month. A fixed price differential is used for production 
streams of less than 20,000 b/d that have no APPI 
assessment. 
The ICP formula described above has been used since April 
1993. Before then the monthly basket price was calculated over a 
period between the 16th of the month prior to delivery and the 15th 
of the delivery month. However, it was changed following pressure 
from end-users to bring the timing in line with other producers in 
the region who all calculate their term prices on a calendar month 
basis. 
Since October 1994, all crudes have been priced using a 
modified formula that includes spot price assessments. This was 
initially introduced in April 1993 just for heavy crudes, notably 
Duri and Widuri, to ensure that the much lighter basket price did 
not distort term prices. But continued criticism of the unresponsive 
nature of a pricing formula based purely on rolling 52-week 
averages has finally persuaded Pertamina to move to a more 
flexible pricing system. Pertamina has increased the proportion of 
spot price assessments used in calculating its ICP price. Plans to 
use quarterly averages appear to have been shelved.. 
Instead of basing the entire calculation on a differential to the 
basket price, the new ICP is calculated as a simple average of the 
standard formula and an average of the spot market quotations for 
each crude during the delivery month. Because of concern over the 
valuation of Indonesian crudes, the basis of the spot market 
assessments was widened to include Plwtt’s and RIM quotations. 
These additional daily price assessments are included only for the 
period covered by the equivalent weekly APPI price assessments. 
Pertamina recently decided to exclude APPI spot market quotations 
from the spot market average from April 1996 onwards. 
4.7.2 Malaysia 
Malaysia produces about 655,000 b/d of mainly light low sulphur 
crudes, the most important being Tapis, which is widely used as a 
regional price marker (see Table 4.26). But export volumes have 
fallen to around 370,000 b/d as new refinery capacity in Malaysia 
absorbs more domestic production, undermining the liquidity of the 
Tapis spot market. 
The ownership of Malaysian crude is divided between the state 
oil company, Petronas, and 41 oil companies of which Esso and 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.7tpage 5

--- Page 212/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Shell are the most important. About one third is used in local 
refineries, Petronas sells about a third of the total production on 
term contracts to Japanese and Korean refiners, India, Thailand, 
Taiwan and Sri Lanka as well as major oil companies and traders, 
and the rest is sold spot either by Petronas or companies with 
production sharing agreements. 
Ta,ble 4.26’ Malaysian export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bld 
'I'api s 44 0.20 360,000 
Labuan 33 0.10 120,000 
Miri 36 0.10 65,000 
Dulang 40 0.12 56,000 
Bintulu 26 0.13 50,000 
Petronas sets an official selling price (OSP) for Malaysian 
crudes retroactively around the end of each delivery month. 
Malaysia sets its OSP using the monthly average of Platt’s and 
APPI Tapis quotes plus a premium decided by Petronas. Any spot 
deals or tenders concluded at fixed prices are also taken into 
account. Separate prices are set for each of the five export grades, 
but the differentials between crudes hardly change. Spot trading of 
Tapis is often done at a premium to the APPI Tapis price (usually 
the average three assessments around the date of the bill of lading). 
4.7.3 Australia 
Australia is a net importer of crude oil but also exported more than 
200,000 b/d of its 540,000 b/d production of crude and condensates 
in 1996. Production should be rising rapidly at present, but 
repeated problems with new offshore fields restricted output well 
below Australia's capacity of over 600,000 b/d. Production is 
expected to rise in 1997 and 1998 as new fields come onstream, 
boosting capacity to over 700,000 b/d. Almost all Australian crudes 
are light and have a very low sulphur content (see Table 4.27). 
They are popular in southeast Asia, but their generally higher 
naphtha cut makes them second choice to Malaysian crudes which 
have a higher distillate yield. 
4.7Ipage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 213/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Table 4.27 Australian. export crudes, 1996 
Crude stream Gravity Sulphur Production 
"API %wt bid 
Timor Sea 
Jabiru 42 0.04 18,000 
ChallisKassini 40 0.07 13,000 
Skua 42 0.01 14,000 
North West Shelf 
Cossack"; 48 0.04 120,000 
Thevenard Island 36 0.05 50,000 
NWS Condensate 54 0.01 80,000 
Griffin 55 0.03 80,000 
Barrow Island 37 0.05 15,000 
Bass Strait 
Gippslmd 46 0.10 210,000 
capacity, awerage production is louw. 
Gippsland crude, produced in the Bass Strait off the coast of 
Victoria in Southern Australia has traditionally made up the bulk 
of Australian production, but expoi-ts have gradually dried up as 
production has been falling. However, growing imports of crude 
from Papua New Guinea by east coast refiners have recently freed 
up more Gippsland crude for export and the commissioning of the 
Bream and Tuna fields in 1997 should add 45,000 b/d to production. 
The bulk of Australian crude exports come from the newer 
producing regions of the Timor Sea and North-West Shelf areas off 
the north and north-west coasts of western Australia, which now 
account for more than half Australia's output. The new offshore 
Cossack crude stream, operated by Woodside Petroleum, first 
started up in November 1995, but the production vessel was 
damaged by storms and production resumed in February 1996. 
Cossack was expected to reach 120,000 b/d in 1996, but the field has 
been beset with problems and output was much lower. Another 
offshore field, Wandoo (40,000 b/d), came onstream in March 1997. 
These producing regions are far from most of Australia's refining 
centres and generally find a better price on the international 
market. About a third of Australian crude exports go to Japan, 
other major buyers include Singapore, Indonesia and the US. 
Unlike the other major producing countries in the region there 
is no close government participation in the Australian oil industry. 
Crude production is handled by private companies who pay taxes to 
the government. The major producing companies in Australia 
include Broken Hill Proprietary (BHP), ESSO, Amp01 Exploration, 
Santos and Woodside Petroleum. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.7fpage 7

--- Page 214/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Australian producers generally sell both spot and term crude 
on the basis of APPI Tapis price assessments. Usually prices are 
negotiated at a premium or discount to the average of the three 
APPI assessments published around the date of the bill of lading. 
4.7.4 China 
China exports just over 300,000 b/d of the 3.2 million b/d of crude 
that it produces. Most exports are through term deals, barter 
arrangements or government to government arrangements. Japan 
is the main importer of Chinese crude, taking about 200,000 b/d. 
Exports are made partly to earn hard currency and partly for 
geographical and logistical reasons. But rising demand means that 
China is no longer a net exporter of crude oil. It is also a growing 
importer of refined product because of a shortage of refinery 
capacity in the south of the country. 
China's main export grade is Daqing (33? API, 0.08 per cent 
sulphur), which is similar in quality to Indonesia's Minas and is 
used for burning in Japanese utilities as well as for refining. 
Exports of Daqing are priced in relation to the ICPs and APPIs of 
Minas and Cinta crudes. The price is an average of the average of 
the two ICPs for the delivery months and the average of the APPI 
price assessments for the two crudes published during the delivery 
month. Spot trade in Chinese crudes is infrequent, although 
occasional cargoes are sold into Japan or the US, usually by 
Japanese trading firms. Spot cargoes are usually sold on an OSP 
related basis but sometimes on a WTI basis. 
4.7.5 Papua New Guinea 
Papua New Guinea began producing crude in mid-1992 and output 
rose quickly to average 140,000 b/d in 1994, but production fell to 
only 110,000 b/d in 1995 and 1996. Further increases are expected 
in 1997 as the Gobe field is brought on stream. All the crude 
produced is exported and the single export grade, Kutubu Light 
(44E API, 0.04 per cent sulphur) has become an important regional 
marker. 
Companies involved in producing Kutubu include BP, 
Chevron, Ampol Exploration, Broken Hill Propriet.ary and 
Mitsubishi Oil. Petroleum Resources Kutubu (PRK) is responsible 
for the Papua New Guinea government's 22.5 per cent shareholding 
in the field. Kutubu is sold at prices related to Tapis APPI. 
4.7Ipage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 215/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
4.7.6 Vietnam 
Vietnam produces just over 150,000 b/d of crude oil from the 
offshore Bach Ho (White Tiger) and Dai Hung (Big Bear) fields. 
Production is forecast to rise over the next few years as new fields 
are being developed and the US embargo has been lifted, although 
some foreign companies have now left the country after disputes 
over upstream investment terms. 
Oil was discovered in 1974 but production did not start until 
1986 when the Bach Ho field was brought on stream by 
Vietsovpetro, a joint venture between Vietnam and the former 
USSR. Dai Hung, originally operated by a consortium led by 
Broken Hill Propriety (BHP), started up in October 1994. Most of 
the crude is exported to Japan either for refining or to be burnt in 
power utilities. But Dai Hung production has fallen from 35,000 b/d 
to 15,000 b/d and the field's reserve estimates have been 
downgraded, and BHP has now withdrawn from the project. Bach 
Ho crude (32QAPI, 0.10 per cent sulphur) is similar in quality to 
Minas and the term price is set every six months as a premium to 
the Minas ICP. Bach Ho is occasionally traded spot, also on a Minas 
APPI basis. Dai Hung (3g9 API, 0.08 per cent sulphur) is a lighter 
gravity crude. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.7fpage 9

--- Page 216/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 217/964 ---
4.8 Latin America 
Oil production in Latin America has grown steadily over the last 
ten years, increasing by more than 30 per cent since 1986 and 
exceeding 8.5 million b/d in 1996. The major oil producers in Latin 
America are Venezuela, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Trinidad & Tobago and Peru (see Table 4.28). Venezuela 
is now the only Opec producer in Latin America since Ecuador left 
the organisation in 1993. The major oil exporters in the region are 
Venezuela, Mexico, Colombia, Argentina, Ecuador and Trinidad & 
Tobago. Although production is rising rapidly in Brazil, it remains 
a net crude importer and only exports a small volume of its own 
output. Peru exports small amounts of its heavy Loreto crude in 
order to balance its crude slate and refines the rest, exporting the 
surplus as pr0duct.s. 
Table 4.28 Latin America crude production and exports, 1996 
Country Production Exports Capacity? 
b/d bld bld 
Argentina 780,000 300,000 820,000 
Brazil 780,000 10,000 860,000 
Colombia 630,000 390,000 650,000 
Ecuador 385,000 250,000 390,000 
Mexico 2,860,000 1,500,000 2,890,000 
Peru 120,000 20,000 130,000 
Trinidad & Tobago 130,000 60,000 130,000 
Venezuela 2,998,000 2,000,000 3,150,000 
fend year 
4.8.1 Argentina 
Argentina's oil production is centred on four main producing 
regions -the Noroeste, in the far north of the country close to the 
borders with Bolivia and Paraguay; the Cuyo-Mendoza and 
Neuquen Basins in the west of the country close to the border with 
Chile; the Golfo San Jorge, in the south of the country and the 
Austral Basin in the extreme south and on the island of Tierra del 
Fuego. Most of the recent increases in production have come from 
the southern provinces of Neuquen, Austral and Chubut. 
Argentina has the most liberalised oil sector in Latin America. 
After the election of President Carlos Menem in 1989, the country 
went through a period of rapid reform, culminating in the 
privatisation of the state oil company YPF. The sale of YPF has also 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8lpage 1

--- Page 218/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
encouraged the growth of other privately-owned oil companies 
which now account for more than half Argentina’s oil output (see 
Table 4.29). 
Argentina‘s oil production has grown dramatically since 
privatisation, rising from 480,000 b/d at the start of the decade to 
more than 800,000 b/d by the end of 1996 -output grew by 10 per 
cent in 1996. In addition, Argentina produces around 63,000 b/d of 
condensate. A low taxation regime, introduced by the Menem 
government after its election in 1989, has also encouraged the 
exploitation of relatively marginal fields. Over the same period, the 
lack of growth in Argentina’s own economy has freed virtually all 
the new output for export, allowing the country’s volume of crude 
oil exports to rise to around 300,000 b/d. Output is expected to 
continue to grow until the end of the decade, reaching 850,000 b/d 
by 2000, but rising domestic demand should absorb most of the 
increased output and will begin to eat into export volumes 
thereafter. 
Table 4.29 Argentinian crude production by company, 1996 
Company Production 
bld 
YPF 360,000 
Perez Companc 92,000 
San Jorge 65,000 
Amoco 60,000 
Astra 40,000 
Total 35,000 
Hridas 25,000 
Tecpetrol 23,000 
Pluspetrol 19,000 
Others 90.000 
Most of Argentina’s crude oil exports remain within the 
Americas. The country’s most important customers are Brazil, 
which took 120,000 b/d in 1996, Chile (105,000 b/d) and the United 
States (60,000 b/d). Other customers include Uruguay, South Africa 
and Taiwan. 
Argentina’s crude oil exports move both by tanker and through 
the 100,000 b/d TransAndean pipeline to the Chilean port of 
Concepcion. This latter route gives Argentinian exporters access to 
Asian and US west coast markets for limited quantities of oil. 
Argentina’s crude oil trade with the US involves mainly term sales 
by YPF to Gulf coast refiners -with Exxon accounting for about 
one third of the volume -while smaller Argentinian companies 
tend to concentrate on regional markets. 
4.8Ipage 2 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 219/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Table 4.30 Argentinia.n export crudes, 1996 
Crude Exports Gravity Sulphur Loading 
stream bld (OAPI) %wt PO& 
Canadon Seco 45,000 25.7 0.23 Celeta Olivia 
Escalante 30,000 24.1 0.19 Bahia Blanca 
Mcdanito 160,000 35.1 0.43 Bahia Blanca 
Rincon 50,000 36.1 0.28 Concepcih (Chile) 
Argentina's crude prices are based on a formula tied to West 
Texas Intermediate at Cushing or to dated Brent. 
4.8.2 Brazil 
Brazil's oil production has almost quadrupled in the last 15 years, 
rising from 220,000 b/d in 1981 to 860,000 b/d by the end of 1996. 
Brazil is a world leader in offshore production technology and the 
majority of its oil production comes from offshore fields, which now 
account for 70 per cent of the country's oil output. The most 
important of the offshore oil provinces is the prolific Campos Basin, 
located some 3'75 lrm east of Rio de Janeiro. Production from three 
new fields in the Campos Basin -Marlim, Albacora and Barracuda -is expected to add some 800,000 b/d to Brazil's oil output by the 
year 2000, raising the country's oil production to around 1.5 million 
b/d. 
Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 4.12 Latin America crudes minus WTI Cushing 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8fpage 3 I

--- Page 220/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Although Brazil has the capacity to refine slightly more than 
1.5 million b/d of crude, it does not have sufficient upgrading 
capacity to handle the large volumes of heavy crude that will come 
from the new Campos Basin fields without reducing the production 
of much-needed light products. As a result, the small volume of 
heavy sweet crude currently exported by Brazil is likely to grow in 
coming years following the liberalisation of the upstream oil 
industry currently underway in the country. By the year 2000, 
Brazil could be exporting as much as 500,000 b/d of heavy (20" API) 
Campos basin crude. A trial cargo of Marlim crude -the first cargo 
of Brazilian crude to be exported for 10 years -was lifted in June 
1996 by Austria's OW. 
The recent liberalisation of joint ventures could further 
improve the long-term outlook for crude production. In the 
meantime, Brazil will remain a large importer of crude from west 
Africa and Latin America, especially Venezuela and Argentina. 
4.8.3 Colombia 
Colombia has rapidly become a major producer of oil in Latin 
America. Its output has grown from less than 200,000 b/d in 1986 to 
nearly 650,000 b/d by the end of 1996 and is expected to continue to 
increase as new fields are brought onstream in 1997. Colombia's oil 
production should reach 1 million b/d by the turn of the century. 
The discovery of the Cusiana and Cupiagua fields added between 2 
and 2.5 billion barrels of reserves and, by the year 2000 once both 
fields are producing at peak rates, should contribute around 
800,000 b/d to Colombia's expected output of 1million b/d. 
Most of Colombia's crude oil is produced from the Llanos Basin 
(Cusiana & Cupiagua fields among others) and from the Cafio 
Limon and neighbouring fields close to the border with Venezuela. 
Crude is also produced from fields along the Magdalena Valley. 
Output from all these provinces is piped northwards to the export 
port of Covenas on Colombia's Caribbean coast. A small amount of 
oil (around 60,000 b/d) is also produced from fields in the Putumayo 
area, close to the border with Ecuador. This oil is transported via 
the Trans-Andean pipeline to the Pacific Ocean port of Tumaco. 
Colombia's oil production and export levels have been restricted 
somewhat by the frequent bombing of both its oil export pipelines 
and such attacks frequently disrupt loading schedules at Covenas. 
4.8lpage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 221/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Tuble 4.31 CoEornbiun export crudes, 1996 
Crude Exports Gravity Sulphur Loading 
stream bld (" API) %J wt port 
Cano Limon 160,000 29.5 0.47 Covenas 
Cusiana 128,000 36.3 0.25 Covenas 
S0ut.h Blcnd 60,000 Tumaco 
Vasconia 45,000 25.3 0.81 Covenas 
Production from the Caiio Limon field, which has been the 
mainstay of Colombia's oil output is declining and is expected to fall 
from a peak of 220,000 b/d in 1990 to around 110,000 b/d by the 
turn of the century. The decline in production from CaAo Limon 
will be more than offset by the increase in production from the 
Llanos Basin fields, with the added benefit that the new crude 
stream is both lighter and sweeter than the one that it will replace. 
A new 500,000 b/d export pipeline linking the Llanos Basin fields to 
the port of Covenas is currently under construction and is due for 
completion in late 1997 or early 1998, greatly increasing Colombia's 
oil export capacity. 
Historically, Caiio Limon has been Colombia's main export 
grade. The oil is sold by the state company Ecopetrol, which 
markets 50 per cent of the exports, and by Shell and Occidental. 
Ecopetrol sells most of its share of Cafio Limon on three to six 
month term contracts, priced off West Texas Intermediate, but also 
sells some as spot cargoes. Shell and Occidental generally sell their 
share of Cano Limon exports on a spot basis to refiners on the US 
Gulf coast. Shell also sells the heavier Vasconia crude in the same 
market. The erratic nature of Colombian exports has prevented 
many customers in the US from entering into term contracts €or 
supplies. 
Cusiana crude has been sold for export on a spot basis since 
June 1995. As with its other grades, Ecopetrol is keen to tie up 
short term contracts for its share of exports, but has also been sellin 
spot cargoes. Foreign partners BP and Total either sell on a spot 
basis or put the crude through their own US refining systems, 
while Triton has sold its share of Cusiana crude production forward 
to finance operations. Cusiana is usually priced against WTI at 
Cushing or sometimes a combination of WTI, LLS and Brent. 
Cusiana exports are set to double in mid-1997 as new pipeline 
capacity comes onstream and then rise further through the rest of 
1997 and early 1998. Cusiana is now an alternative delivery option 
under the Nymex Light Sweet Crude (WTIj futures contract (see 
Chapter 8). 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8fpage 5

--- Page 222/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Colombia exported 225,000 b/d of crude to the US in 1996, 
compared with 207,000 b/d in 1995 and 146,000 b/d in 1994. This 
volume is likely to increase as output from Cusiana and Cupiagua 
increases in the coming years, more than offsetting declines in 
other areas. 4.8.4 
Ecuador 
Ecuador's crude oil output has grown by almost 20 per cent in the 
four years since it left Opec, rising from 330,000 b/d in 1992 to 
390,000 b/d by the end of 1996. The country plans to expand 
production by a further 50 per cent to 600,000 b/d by the turn of the 
century, but additional pipeline capacity from the major oil-
producing province of Oriente in the northeast of the country is 
required before this can be realised. Recent political upheavals in 
Ecuador and disputes over pricing have set back plans to expnnd 
production and exports. 
The US Gulf coast is the largest export market for Ecuador's 
crude oil, with additional volumes going to the US west coast, 
Brazil and South Korea. Ecuador exported 93,000 b/d of crude to 
the US in 1996, much the same volume as in the previous two 
years. Ecuador's major export grade, Oriente, used to be similar in 
quality to Alaskan North Slope, but is becoming progressively 
heavier and more sulphurous as the output from new fields is 
added to the crude stream. In the past year or so, its gravity has 
dropped from 28.8 to 25.4"API and its sulphur content has risen 
from 1to 1.3 per cent by weight. As a result, the crude is becoming 
much less attractive to refiners (see Fig. 4.12). 
Table 4.32 Ecuadorean export crudes, 1996 
Crude Exports Gravity Sulphur Loading 
stream b/d (" API) % wt port 
Oriente 250.000 25.4 1.3 Esmereldas 
Oriente is marketed exclusively by Petroecuador. It is sold fob. 
and is priced off Alaskan North Slope or West Texas Intermediate 
(since 1Q97, previously the pricing formula used West Texas Sourj, 
with differentials determined by destination. The crude is loaded at 
Esmereldas in the north of the country and cargoes are limited by 
the capacity of the Panama Canal to 50,000 tonne ships. Oriente 
crude is, as far as possible, sold under annual term contracts, 
usually in multiples of 12,000 b/d, although Petroecuador has at 
times been forced to resort to spot sales on a temporary basis. The 
main purchasers of Ecuador's crude are Tripetrol and Glencore who 
4.8Ipage 6 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 223/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
contribute to the active spot trade in Oriente once the cargoes have 
been lifted. 
4.8.5 Mexico 
Mexico’s oil production grew by 8 per cent in 1996, averaging 2.86 
million b/d for the year. Output is expected to grow further in 1997 
to an average level of 3.2 million b/d. Two fields, Cantarell and 
Abkatum, both located offshore in the Bay of Campeche, account for 
around 40 per cent of Mexico’s entire crude oil production while the 
remainder comes from some 70 fields located both offshore and 
onshore along the country’s Gulf of Mexico coast. Stagnant 
domestic oil demand has allowed Mexico to boost the volume of its 
oil exports as production has increased in the last two years, but it 
may be difficult for the country to maintain the growth in exports 
as the economy picks up. 
Mexico has three crude oil export grades (see Table 4.33) -the 
heavy, sour Maya 121.5”API, 3.4 per cent sulphur), the medium to 
light, high-sulphur Isthmus (33.3OAP1, 1.2 per cent sulphur) and 
the light, low-sulphur Olmeca (39.loAPI, 0.7 percent sulphur). 
Maya, which accounts for around 60 per cent of total overseas 
sales, is blended from the output of a number of offshore fields, 
including Cantarell, in the Bay of Campeche and is exported from 
the Cay0 Arcas open-sea terminal in the Caribbean and from Salina 
Cruz on Mexico’s Pacific coast. 
Isthmus is blended from the output of a number of fields and is 
similar in quality to Arabian Light and West Texas Sour. Most 
Isthmus crude is refined in Mexico, leaving 200-300,000 b/d for 
export. Isthmus crude is exported from the Dos Bocas terminal on 
the southern shore of the Bay of Campeche and, like Maya, from 
the Salina Cruz terminal on the Pacific coast. 
Olmeca, which is favoured as a feedstock for lubricants and 
petrochemicals, is also a blend of crudes from a number of fields. It 
is exported from the Dos Bocas terminal on Mexico’s Caribbean 
coast. 
Table 4.33 Mexican export crudes, 1996 
Crude Exports Gravity Sulphur Loading 
stream bid to MI) %,wt nort 
Isthmus 200,000 33.3 1.22 Dos Bocas/Salina Cruz 
Maya 850,000 21.5 3.43 Cay0 ArcasISalina Cruz 
Olmeca 450,000 39.1 0.72 Dos Bocas 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8ipage 7

--- Page 224/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The majority of the crude oil exported from Mexico is sold in 
the United States; but smaller volumes find their way to Spain -
where Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex) holds a refining stake -and 
Japan, which are the next biggest buyers of Mexican crude. 
Mexico's oil exports to the US have grown steadily during the 1990s 
and it is now the third largest source of imports after Venezuela 
and Saudi Arabia. The US imported 1.2 million b/d of crude from 
Mexico in 1996, almost 20 per cent more than it imported in 1995 
and nearly 30 per cent more than it imported in 1994. 
Most Mexican crude is sold on an fob basis by Pemex to 
refiners under term contracts. Third-party trading in Mexican 
crude is prohibited. Mexico's location as a short-haul supplier to the 
US and its flexibility over monthly liftings has tended to outweigh 
the complex price formulas (see Table 4.34) and the frequent 
loading disruptions caused by bad weather conditions. Recently 
Mexico has been seeking to sell crude to refiners on the US west 
coast in order to alleviate the growing glut of sour crudes in the 
Caribbean basin. 
Table 4.34 Pricing formulas fbr Mexican export crudes, 1997 
Crude Destination Weighting 
stream 
Isthmus US (0.4:':WTS) + (0.4:':LLS) + (0.Pdtd Brent) 
Tsthmus Europe (0.887"dtd Brent) + (0.113*3.5%FO)-
(0.16'(1%FO -3.5%FO)) 
Isthmus Far East (O.5"Oman) + (0.5"l)ubai) 
Maya us (0.4"WTS) + (0.4":3%FO) + (0.Pdtd Brent) 
Maya Europe (0.527"dtd 13rent) + (0.467*3.5%bi0) -
(0.25"(l%FO -3,5%FO)) 
Maya Far East (O.S*Oman) + (0.5*Dubai) 
Olmeca us (0.333*WTS) + (0.333*LLS) + (0.333*dtd Brent.) 
4.8.6 Peru 
Peru currently produces around 130,000 b/d of crude oil, but hopes 
to boost its output to 150,000 b/d by 1998. Although the country's 
oil reserves are only a fraction of those of Venezuela or Mexico, the 
sweetening of investment terms has ensured that Peru has 
attracted the interest of several of the major oil companies. 
At present, Occidental produces around half of Peru's output 
from its Block 1-AB on the disputed border with Ecuador. This oil is 
sold to Petroperu under the terms of Occidental's risk service 
contract. Most of the remainder is produced by Petroperu from its 
Block 8 (33,000 b/d) in the Maranon basin in the northern jungle 
and Block X (15,000 b/d) in the northern coastal plain of Talara, 
4.8Ipage 8 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 225/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
and by Petromar which recovers some 20,000 b/d from the country's 
offshore fields. 
Peru's oil law was altered in 1993 to allow private companies to 
dispose of their oil as they see fit, rather than forcing them to sell it 
to Petroperu. Since then, more than a dozen new contracts have 
been signed with private companies, both domestic and foreign, and 
it is hoped that the increased exploration work that has resulted 
from this revision will boost production from existing areas and 
lead to the opening up of new areas. Areas of particular interest are 
the Madre de Dios basin in the southern jungle and the Ucayali 
basin in the central region of the Peruvian jungle. Neither area is 
served by pipelines, but exploration in Ucayali has led to the 
discovery of four oil and three gadcondensate fields which could be 
commercially exploited. 
Peru has a refining capacity of 147,000 bld, while domestic 
consumption is currently around 120,000 b/d. The country is a net 
importer of crude and a net exporter of oil products. Peru currently 
exports about two cargoes a month of its heavy (1gP API) Loreto 
crude to the US in order to balance its refining slate. 
4.8.7 Trinidad and Tobago 
Seven companies in Trinidad and Tobago currently produce around 
130,000 b/d of crude (see Table 4.35). Output has begun to increase 
again in recent years after declining from a peak level of close to 
200,000 b/d in 1980 to 110,000 b/d in 1993. 
Trinidad and Tobago exported 33,000 bld of crude to the US in 
1996, slightly less than the 62,000 b/d it exported there in each of 
the two previous years. 
Table 4.35 Trinidad and Tobago’s crude production, 1996 
Company Production 
b/d 
Amoco Trinidad 60,000 
Enron 6,500 
Moraven 500 
PCOL 660 
Petrotrin 28,750 
TNA 31,700 
Trintomar 1.200 
4.8.8 Venezuela 
Venezuela's oil production has grown spectacularly in recent years, 
rising from 1.75 million b/d in 1985 to an average level of almost 3 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8fpage 9

--- Page 226/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
million b/d in 1996 -although the Venezuelan government 
disputes this figure, claiming that the country's output is still in 
line with its Opec quota allocation of 2.359 million b/d. 
Nonetheless, the state oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela 
(PdVSA), plans to boost output capacity to 6.3 million b/d by the 
year 2006. While PdVSA has itself undertaken substantial 
investment to boost production, Venezuela has recently opened its 
upstream oil sector to foreign companies in three ways. 
Firstly, a number of marginal fields with minimal existing 
production have been offered to private companies to reactivate and 
develop. Two marginal field bidding rounds had been completed by 
the end of 1996 and a third group of fields is being offered in 1997. 
Output from the fields offered in the first two rounds has risen from 
76,000 b/d in 1995 to 190,000 b/d in 1996. 
Secondly, eight areas were awarded to private companies in 
January 1996 under exploration and production risk contracts. On 
discovery of oil, joint ventures will be formed between the private 
companies and PdVSA to exploit the fields. 
Table 4.36’ Venezuelan extra-heavy crude upg.rading contractsk 
Venezuelan Foreign Volume of Volume of 
partner partner(s) crude synthetic crude 
bld bld 
Maraven Total/Statoil/Norsk Hydro 170,000 156,000 
Maraven Conoco 120,000 102,000 
Corpoven Arco/Texaco/Phillips 207,000 164,000 
Corpoven Exxon n.a. n.a. 
Lagoven Mobil 100,000 87,000 
* alreudn, signed or under negolialion 
Thirdly, association contracts have been signed or are being 
negotiated between PdVSA subsidiaries and private companies to 
produce and transform extra-heavy crude from the Orinoco belt 
into 20"API synthetic crude (see Table 4.36). 
Venezuelan crudes are generally heavy, with Tia Juana Light 
at 32"API, the lightest crude stream available for export (see Table 
4.37). The potential market for most Venezuelan crudes is limited 
because few refiners are able to process heavy crudes with a high 
metals content. Venezuela has sought to overcome this difficulty by 
investing in sophisticated refinery capacity both at home and 
abroad. As a result, much of the oil that the count.ry produces 
remains within its own refining system. 
Venezuela has 2.4 mn b/d of refining capacity in Venezuela, 
the Caribbean, the US and Europe, leaving it with around 700,000 
4.8lpage 10 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 227/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
b/d of crude to sell to third parties. The bulk of this excess is sold 
into the US market, although some also finds its way into the 
sophisticated refineries in Europe. In 1996, Venezuela became the 
largest single supplier of imported oil to the US: its exports to the 
US of 1.305 million b/d exceeded those of Saudi Arabia for the first 
time. 
Table 4.37 Venezuelan export crudes, 1996’ 
Crude Exports Gravity Sulphur Loading 
stream bld ("API) %wt port 
Bachaquero 13.0 2.68 Punta Cardon 
BCF-17 16.2 2.47 La Salina 
Roscan 10.1 5.40 Rajo Grande 
Furrial 30.0 1.10 Puerto La Cruz 
Tia Juana Heavy 12.3 2.82 Punt,a Cardon 
Tia Juana Light 32.0 1.20 La Salina 
Although Venezuela still posts prices for its crudes, most sales 
are on a term-contract basis. These contracts -handled by the 
PdV subsidiaries Corpoven, Lagoven and Maraven -are generally 
extremely flexible, allowing variations in both price and volume to 
suit individual purchasers. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 4.8lpage 11

--- Page 228/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 229/964 ---
Appendix 4.1 
Official crude prices, 1993 
$/barrel Jan Feb 
MIDDLE EAST 
ABU DHABl 
Muvban 16.90 17.90 
L Zakurn 16.80 17.80 
U Zakum 15.40 16.40 
Umm Shaif 16.55 17.55 
OMAN’ 
Oman 15.84 16.80 
QATAR* 
Dukhan!Land 16.34 17.30 
Marine 16.19 17.15 
EGYPT* 
Suez Blend 14.44 15.16 
Rasal-Behar 15.09 15.81 
Zeit Bay 15.04 15.76 
Belayim 13.04 13.66 
Ras Budran 11.69 12.41 
RasGharib 11.14 11.76 
FAR EAST INDONESIA* 
A 
Minas 17.89 17.51 
Duri 15.32 14.96 
Lalang 18.07 17.68 
MALAYSIA* Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
17.95 17.85 17.55 17.25 16.00 16.50 15.90 16.65 15.40 14.00 
17.85 17.75 17.45 17.15 15.90 16.40 15.80 16.55 15.30 13.90 
16.40 16.30 15.95 15.55 14.15 14.70 14.10 14.80 13.55 12.10 
17.55 17.45 17.15 16.85 15.60 16.10 15.50 16.25 15.00 13.55 
16.95 17.05 16.70 16.46 15.21 15.46 14.60 15.26 14.12 12.68 
17.45 17.55 17.20 16.96 15.71 15.96 15.25 15.98 14.95 13.43 
17.30 17.40 17.05 16.81 15.56 15.81 14.95 15.70 14.70 13.18 
15.39 15.34 15.19 14.20 13.47 13.56 13.06 13.71 12.39 11.03 
16.04 15.94 15.84 14.85 14.12 14.21 13.71 14.36 13.04 11.68 
15.99 15.89 15.79 14.80 14.07 14.16 13.66 14.31 12.99 11.63 
13.89 13.89 13.74 12.80 12.07 12.16 11.66 12.36 11.04 9.68 
12.79 12.84 12.74 11.86 11.22 11.36 10.86 11.56 10.29 9.03 
11.99 12.04 11.94 11.06 10.42 10.56 10.06 10.76 9.49 8.33 
A 
18.42 18.84 18.67 18.41 17.44 17.56 17.01 17.13 16.07 14.50 
15.92 16.61 16.70 16.07 14.68 14.35 13.70 13.93 12.87 11.17 
18.59 18.99 18.80 18.52 17.53 17.65 17.07 17.19 16.12 14.56 
Tapis 19.50 19.30 20.35 21.00 20.55 19.70 18.95 18.95 18.95 18.30 17.70 16.05 
Labuan 19.40 19.20 20.25 20.90 20.45 19.60 19.05 19.05 19.05 18.40 17.80 16.15 
Miri 19.20 19.00 20.05 20.70 20.25 19.40 18.85 18.85 18.85 18.20 17.60 15.95 
Bintulu 18.70 18.50 19.55 20.20 19.75 18.90 18.45 18.45 18.45 17.80 17.20 15.55 
BRUNEI’ 
Seria Lt 19.40 19.10 20.25 20.90 20.35 19.60 18.85 18.85 18.80 18.20 17.60 15.95 
OPEC BASKET# 
Average 16.71 17.66 18.15 18.12 17.89 17.08 15.95 15.90 15.24 15.75 14.47 12.88 
#Saharan Blend, Minas, Bonny Light, Arab Light, Dubai, Tia Juana and Isthmus crudes. 
*retfoaclive +forward "midmunth 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.llpage 1

--- Page 230/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Official crude prices, 1994 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
MIDDLE EAST 
ABU DHABI * 
Murban 15.10 14.60 13.75 15.45 16.10 17.00 17.60 1700 16.70 16.90 17.55 16.85 
L Zakum 15.00 14.50 13.65 15.35 16.00 16.90 17.50 16.90 16.60 16.80 17.45 16.75 
UZakum 13.30 12.80 12.05 13.90 14.65 15.65 16.40 15.75 15.30 15.40 16.05 15.50 
Umm Shaif 14.65 14.15 13.30 15.00 15.60 16.50 17.10 1650 16.20 16.40 17.05 16.35 
OMAN* 
Oman 13.78 13.24 12.35 14.20 15.05 16.08 16.90 16.21 15.71 15.84 16.64 16.04 
QATAR* 
Dukhan/Land 14.58 14.14 13.33 15.02 15.80 16.68 17.38 16.79 16.40 16.58 17.22 16.62 
Marine 14.35 13.94 13.13 14.84 15.62 16.51 17.18 16.59 16.20 16.40 17.03 16.44 
EGYPT* 
Suez Blend 12.00 11.65 12.00 13.56 14.54 15.09 15.92 14.92 14.23 14.87 15.85 14.58 
Rasal-Behar 12.65 12.30 12.65 14.16 15.14 15.69 16.52 15.47 14.73 15.42 16.40 15.13 
Zeit Bay 12.60 12.25 12.60 14.11 15.09 15.64 16.47 15.42 14.73 15.37 16.35 15.08 
Belayim 10.70 10.35 10.75 12.56 13.59 14.14 14.97 14.02 13.33 13.92 14.85 13.68 
Ras Budran 10.05 9.70 10.10 11.91 13.04 13.59 14.57 13.62 13.03 13.62 14.55 13.33 
RasGharib 9.40 9.05 9.40 11.21 12.34 12.89 13.82 12.87 12.28 12.87 13.85 12.78 
FAR EAST INDONESIA* 
Minas 15.04 15.20 14.46 15.04 15.76 16.58 17.56 17.63 16.38 16.35 16.42 16.27 
Duri 11.69 12.17 11.45 11.98 12.97 13.88 15.64 1622 14.93 14.73 15.01 14.82 
Lalang 15.09 15.24 14.50 15.10 15.83 16.65 17.63 17.69 16.42 16.30 16.45 16.25 
MALAYSIA* 
Tapis 15.70 16.55 16.10 15.85 16.70 17.30 18.65 19.35 18.10 18.05 17.60 17.60 
Labuan 15.80 16.65 16.20 15.95 16.80 17.40 18.75 19.45 18.20 18.15 17.70 17.70 
Miri 15.60 16.45 16.00 15.75 16.60 17.20 18.60 19.25 18.00 17.95 17.50 17.50 
Bintulu 15.20 16.05 15.60 15.35 16.20 16.80 18.15 19.05 17.80 17.75 17.30 17.30 
BRUNEI* 
Seria Lt 15.60 16.45 16.00 15.75 16.65 17.20 18.50 19.35 18.05 18.00 17.55 17.55 
OPEC BASKET# 
Average 13.71 13.76 13.34 14.52 15.74 16.50 17.41 16.86 15.71 16.13 16.72 15.84 
#Saharan Blend, Minas, Bonny Light, Arab Light, Dubai, Tia Juana and Isthmus crudes. 
*retroactive iforward "midmonth 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.llpage 2 Supplement 2 Jun 1996

--- Page 231/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Official crude prices, 1995 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr 
MIDDLE EAST 
ABU DHABI * 
Murban 1735 17.90 17.40 18.45 
L Zakum 17.25 17.80 17.30 17.40 
UZakum 16.05 16.75 16.35 17.50 
Umm Shaif 16 90 17.50 17.00 18.05 
OMAN* 
Oman 16.55 17.10 16.60 17.70 
QATAR* 
Dukhan/Land 17.16 17.69 17.15 18.20 
Marine 16.98 17.54 17.01 18.00 
EGYPT* 
Suez Blend 15.54 16.23 16.18 17.83 
Rasal-Behar 16.09 16.68 16.58 18.23 
Zeit Bay 16.04 16.63 16.53 18.18 
Belayim 14.74 15.53 15.48 17.13 
Ras Budran 14.44 15.23 15.18 16.88 
RasGharib 13.84 14.63 14.58 16.28 
FAR EAST 
INDONESIA* 
Minas 17.17 18.16 18.20 18.41 
Duri 1557 16.27 15.94 16.46 
Widuri 16.36 17.32 17.42 17.71 
MALAYSIA* 
Tapis 18.46 19.13 19.09 19.57 
Labuan 18.56 19.23 19.19 19.67 
Miri 18.36 19.03 18.99 19.47 
Bintulu 18.16 18.83 18.79 19.27 
BRUNEI* 
Seria Lt 18.05 19.00 19.35 18.85 
OPEC BASKET# 
Average 16.67 17.29 17.15 18.28 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
18.20 17.00 15.80 16 30 16-50 16.00 16 95 18.40 
18.15 16.95 15.75 16.30 16.50 16.00 16.95 18.40 
17.35 16.20 15.00 15.35 15.45 14.80 15.65 16.95 
17.80 16.60 15.40 15 90 16-10 15.60 16 55 18.00 
17.49 16.43 15.18 15.56 15.60 15.00 15.96 17.48 
17.86 16.66 15.44 15.87 15.98 15.44 16.38 17.80 
17.72 16.52 15.30 15.73 15.84 15.32 16.26 17.68 
17.40 16.13 14.26 14.16 14.99 14.51 15.25 16.50 
17.80 16.53 14.66 14.61 15.44 14.96 15.70 16.95 
17.75 16.48 14.61 14.56 15.39 14.91 15.65 16.90 
16.75 15.43 13.56 13.26 14.29 13.81 15.55 15.80 
16.55 15.18 13.46 13.26 14.14 13.66 14.40 15.65 
15.85 14.58 12.71 12.56 13.44 12.96 13.70 14.95 
18.50 17.42 16.21 16.48 16.58 16.38 16.96 18.34 
16.96 16.38 15.28 15 15 15.12 14.71 15 25 16.72 
17.94 16.92 15.63 15.92 16.00 15.76 16.36 17.70 
19.80 18.91 17.52 17.51 17.60 17.36 18.13 19.72 
19.90 19.01 17.62 17.61 17.70 17.46 18.23 19.82 
19.70 18.81 17.42 17.41 17.50 17.26 18.03 19.62 
19.50 18.61 17.22 17.21 17.30 17.06 17.83 19.42 
19.90 19.40 17.90 17.55 17.60 17.35 17.75 19.10 
18.13 16.98 15.63 15.95 16.35 15.85 16.49 17.74 
#Saharan Blend, Minas, Bonny Lighi, Arab Light, Dubai, Tia Juana and Isihmus crudes. 
*retroactive +forward "midmonth 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Supplement 2 Jun 1996 Appendix 4.lfpage 3

--- Page 232/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Official crude prices, 1996 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
MIDDLE EAST 
ABU DHABI * 
Murban 18.20 17.45 18.45 19.25 18.60 19-00 19.55 2045 22.30 23.80 23.10 24.20 
L Zakum 18.20 17.45 18.45 19.30 18.65 19.10 19.65 20.50 22.35 23.85 23.15 24.25 
U Zakum 16.65 15.90 16.95 17.70 16.95 17.30 17.85 18.75 20.55 21.95 21.20 22.10 
Umm Shaif 17.80 17.05 18.05 18.85 18.25 18.70 19.25 20 15 22.00 23.55 22.85 23.95 
OMAN* 
Oman 17.26 16.50 17.77 18.63 17.89 18.24 18.77 19.60 21.20 22.50 21.80 22.80 
QATAR* 
Dukhan/Land 17.63 16.90 17.93 18.80 18.15 18.45 19.05 19.93 21.75 23.11 22.49 23.50 
Marine 17.53 16.80 17.83 18.68 18.04 18.37 18.76 19.84 21.66 23.03 22.42 23.43 
EGYPT? differential to dated Brent 
Suez Blend -1.45 -1.20 -1.55 -1.45 -1.65 -1.80 -2.50 -2.40 -2.25 -2.15 -2.10 -2.35 
Ras al-Behar -1.05 -0.85 -0.95 -0.95 -0.95 -1.20 -1.65 -1 55 -1.45 -1.35 -1.35 -1.60 
Zeit Bay -1.10 -0.90 -1.00 -1.00 -1.00 -1.25 -1.70 -1.60 -1.50 -1.40 -1.40 -1.65 
Belayim -2.20 -1.85 -2.05 -2.18 -2.38 -2.53 -3.20 -3.05 -3.00 -3.00 -3.15 -3.20 
Ras Budran -2.35 -2.00 -2.20 -2.33 -2.53 -2.75 -3.40 -3.25 -3.20 -3.20 -3.35 -3.50 
Ras Gharib -3.10 -2.90 -3.10 -3.23 -3.43 -3.65 -4.30 -4.05 -4.00 -4.00 -4.00 -4.00 
FAR EAST INDONESIA* 
Minas 19.35 18.87 19.19 19.33 18.94 19.28 19.71 19.49 21.02 23.12 22.60 23.11 
Duri 17.72 17.17 17.60 18.17 18.16 18.12 18.18 1797 19.46 21.54 21.07 21.56 
Widuri 18.67 18.19 18.53 18.73 18.27 18.57 19.05 18.93 20.35 22.33 21.80 22.30 
MALAYSIA* 
Tapis 20.89 21.05 21.61 21.25 20.58 20.66 20.86 21.19 23.01 25.70 25.04 25.44 
Labuan 20.99 21.15 21.71 21.35 20.68 20.76 20.96 21.29 23.11 25.80 25.16 25.54 
Miri 20.97 21.13 21.51 21.15 20.48 20.56 20.76 21.09 22.91 25.60 24.94 25.34 
Bintulu 20.59 20.75 21.31 20.95 20.28 20.36 20.56 20.89 22.71 25.40 24.74 25.14 
BRUNEI* 
Seria Lt 20.85 21.20 21.65 21.75 20.60 20.55 21.10 21.05 22.20 24.80 26.20 25.25 
OPEC BASKET# 
Average 18.05 17.90 19.35 20.24 28.92 18.37 19.29 19.94 21.68 23.28 22.20 23.51 
#Saharan Blend, Minas, Bonny Light, Arab Light, Dubai, Tia Juana and Isthmus crudes. 
*retroactive 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.llpage 4 Supplement 3 May 1996

--- Page 233/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Official crude prices, 1997 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
MIDDLE EAST 
ABU DHABl * 
Murban 23.75 20.85 20.05 18.30 
L Zakurn 23.80 20.90 20.10 16.35 
U Zakum 21.65 18.90 18.25 16.70 
Umm Shaif 23.50 20.60 19.80 18.05 
OMAN’ 
Oman 22.50 19.72 19.10 17.53 
QATAR* 
DukhaWLand 23.16 20.33 19.50 17.94 Marine 23.09 20.25 19.36 17.72 
EGYPT: differential to dated Brent 
Suez Blend -2.10 -2.35 -2.50 -2.75 
Ras al-Behar -1.60 -1.75 -1.90 -2.1 0 
Zeit Bay -1.65 -1.80 -1.95 -2.15 
Belayim -3.35 -3.60 -3.60 -3.70 
Ras Budran -3.65 -3.60 -3.60 -3.85 
RasGharib -4.20 -4.35 -4.35 -4.40 
FAR EAST INDONESIA* 
Minas 24.13 21.36 19.24 16.28 Duri 22.47 19.80 17.63 16.62 
Widuri 23.28 
 20.54 16.39 17.41 
MALAYSIA* 
Tapis 26.23 23.79 22.39 21.23 
Labuan 26.38 23.94 22.54 21.38 Miri 26.33 
 23.89 22.49 21.33 
Bintulu 25.83 23.39 21.99 20.83 
BRUNEI’ 
Seria Lt 26.75 25.35 22.95 22.10 
OPEC BASKET# 
Average 23.19 20.49 18.69 17.46 
#Saharan Blend. Minas, Bonny Light, Arab Light, Dubai, Tia Juana and Isthmus crudes 
*retroactive 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Supplement 3 May 1996 Appendix 4.lIpage 5

--- Page 234/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 235/964 ---
Appendix 4.2 
Formula crude prices, 1993 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
SAUDI ARABIA fob Ras Tanura 
fob US: spot ANS 
Arab Lt -1.00 -1.00 -1.00 -1.00 -1.20 -1.40 -1.40 -1.50 -1.30 -1.30 -1.20 -1.20 
Arab Med -2.25 -2.40 -2.40 -2.40 -2.60 -2.70 -2.70 -2.90 -2.60 -2.60 -2.60 -2.60 
Arab Hy -3.15 -3.50 -3.30 -3.30 -3.50 -3.60 -3.60 -3.90 -3.50 -3.50 -3.50 -3.50 
Berri -0.15 0.10 0.10 0.10 -0.20 -0.50 -0.50 -0.50 -0.30 -0.30 -0.20 -0.20 
cif USGC: spot ANS 
Arab Lt 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10 -0.10 -0.30 -0.30 -0.40 -0.20 -0.20 -0.10 -0.10 
Arab Med -1.15 -1.30 -1.30 -1.30 -1.50 -1.60 -1.60 -1.80 -1.50 -1.50 -1.50 -1.50 
Arab Hy -2.05 -2.40 -2.20 -2.20 -2.40 -2.50 -2.50 -2.80 -2.40 -2.40 -2.40 -2.40 
fob Europe: dtd Brent 
Arab Lt -1.85 -2.15 -2.30 -2.30 -2.50 -2.65 -2.65 -2.65 -2.45 -2.35 -2.20 -2.00 
Arab Med -3.1 0 -3.60 -3.70 -3.70 -3.70 -4.00 -4.00 -4.00 -3.80 -3.65 -3.50 -3.30 
Arab Hy -4.05 -4.75 -4.75 -4.75 -4.75 -5.05 -5.05 -5.05 -4.85 -4.70 -4.60 -4.35 
Berri -1.10 -1.10 -1.30 -1.40 -1.65 -1.85 -1.85 -1.85 -1.65 -1.55 -1.35 -1.15 
fob Far East: avg Oman/Dubai 
Arab Lt 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.30 0.30 
Arab Med -1.15 -1.30 -1.30 -1.30 -1.30 -1.30 -1.30 -1.40 -1.30 -1.20 -1.10 -1.15 
Arab Hy -2.30 -2.65 -2.65 -2.50 -2.50 -2.50 -2.50 -2.60 -2.40 -2.25 -2.15 -2.25 
Berri 1.35 1.50 1.30 1.25 1.15 1.15 1.15 1.10 1.20 1.30 1.45 1.50 
IRAN: Oman or Dubai* 
lran Lt even even -0.20 -0.20 -0.20 -0.20 -0.30 -0.40 -0.40 -0.40 -0.30 -0.30 
lran Hy -0.93 -1.08 -0.98 -0.98 -0.98 -0.98 -0.98 -1.08 -0.98 -0.88 -0.78 -0.78 
* for /ran Lt use Oman, for lran Hy use Dubai, fob Kharg lsland destination Far East 
KUWAIT: avg OmanlDubai 
Kuwait -1.25 -1.40 -1.40 -1.40 -1.40 -1.40 -1.40 -1.50 -1.40 -1.30 -1.20 -1.25 
fob Mina aldhmadi destination Far East 
QATAR: avg spot Oman 
Dukhan 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.53 0.50 0.65 0.72 0.83 0.75 
Marine 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.38 0.35 0.35 0.44 0.58 0.50 
NIGERIA: to dtd Brentt 
Bonny Light 0.40 0.4 0.57 0.57 0.50 0.40 0.52 0.62 0.40 0.33 0.42 0.52 
BrassRiver 0.40 0.40 0.57 0.67 0.60 0.57 0.62 0.72 0.50 0.43 0.59 0.70 
Qua lboe 0.40 0.40 0.57 0.57 0.50 0.40 0.52 0.62 0.40 0.33 0.42 0.52 
Pennington 0.40 0.40 0.57 0.77 0.70 0.67 0.75 0.85 0.70 0.63 0.79 0.92 
Forcados -0.20 even 0.15 0.25 0.30 0.40 0.30 0.40 0.45 0.38 0.48 0.60 
Escravos 0.35 0.35 0.52 0.52 0.45 0.35 0.47 0.57 0.35 0.28 0.37 0.47 
Bonny Medium -0.35 -0.15 even 0.10 0.20 0.25 0.10 0.20 0.20 0.13 0.22 0.35 
tpriced five days after bill of lading 
MEXICO to FE: avg Oman/Dubal 
Isthmus 0.90 0.85 0.75 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.70 0.70 
Maya -4.20 -4.65 -4.60 -4.45 -4.45 -4.45 -4.35 -4.50 -4.20 -4.00 -4.00 -4.15 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.2lpage 1

--- Page 236/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Formula crude prices, 1994 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
SAUDI ARABIA lob Ras Tanura 
fob US: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -3.60 -3.25 -3.00 -3.00 -3.00 -2.80 -2.80 -3.25 -2.80 -3.05 -2.75 -2.85 
Arab Med -5.05 -4.40 -4 10 -4.10 -4.05 -3.75 -3.70 -4.10 -3.55 -4 00 -3.55 -3.55 
Arab Hy -6.00 -5.20 -4.90 -4.90 -4.80 -4.40 -4.30 -4.65 -4.00 -4.60 -4.00 -4.00 
Berri -2.60 -2.40 -2 15 -2.05 -2.50 -1.95 -1.95 -2.40 -2.00 -2 15 -2.00 -2.15 
cif USGC: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -2.50 -2.15 -1.90 -1.90 -1.90 -1.70 -1.70 -2.10 -1.65 -1.85 -1.50 -1.65 
Arab Med -3.95 -3.30 -3.00 -3.00 -2.95 -2.65 -2.60 -2.95 -2.40 -2.80 -2.35 -2.35 
Arab Hy -4.90 -4.10 -3.80 -3.80 -3.70 -3.30 -3.20 -3.50 -2.85 -3.40 -2.80 -2.80 
fob Europe: dtd Brent 
Arab Lt -1.90 -1.80 -1.60 -1.60 -1.50 -1.50 -1.50 -1.60 -1.60 -1.60 -1.45 -1.45 
Arab Med -3.20 -3.05 -2 65 -2.45 -2.30 -2.25 -2.15 -2.30 -2.15 -2 40 -2.20 -2.00 
Arab Hy -4.25 -4.00 -3.45 -3.05 -2.85 -2.75 -2.60 -2.80 -2.55 -3.00 -2.80 -2.55 
Berri -1.05 -0.95 -085 -0.95 -0.85 -0.95 -1.00 -1.10 -1.10 -0 90 -0.75 -0.95 
fob Far East: avg OmanlDubai 
Arab Lt 0.35 0.35 0.45 0.40 0.40 0.65 0.50 0.55 0.40 0.50 0.50 0.50 
Arab Med -1.30 -1.05 -0.70 -0.80 -0.80 -0.40 -0.30 -0.25 -0.10 -0.55 -0.55 -0.45 
Arab Hy -2.50 -2.10 -1.50 -1.60 -1.60 -1.10 -0.90 -0.85 -0.50 -1.20 -1.20 -1.10 
Berri 1.55 1.45 1.45 1.30 1.20 1.35 1.10 1.10 0.80 1.20 1.20 1.20 
IRAN: Oman or Dubai’ 
lran Lt -0.30 -0.30 -0.20 -0.27 -0.27 -0.02 -0.17 -0.17 -0.27 -0.17 -0.17 -0.17 
lran Hy -0.93 -0.68 -0.33 -0.40 -0.40 even 0.12 0.12 0.32 -0.18 -0.18 -0.18 
* for /ran Lt use Oman, forlran Hy use Dubai, fob Kharg /s/and destination Far East 
KUWAIT: avg OmanlDubai 
Kuwait -1.40 -1 .15 -0.80 -0.90 -0.90 -0.50 -0.40 -0.35 -0.20 -0.65 -0.65 -0.55 
fob Mina a/-Ahmadi destination Far East 
QATAR: avg spot Oman 
Dukhan 0.80 0.90 0.98 0.82 0.75 0.60 0.48 0.58 0.69 0.74 0.58 0.58 
Marine 0.57 0.70 0.78 0.64 0.57 0.43 0.28 0.38 0.49 0.56 0.39 0.40 
NIGERIA: to dtd Brentt 
Bonny Light 0.35 0.68 0.45 0.43 0.45 0.37 0.33 0.20 0.15 0.22 0.41 0.00 
Brass River 0.55 0.84 0.60 0.58 0.58 0.50 0.40 0.28 0.15 0.24 0.48 0.05 
Qua lboe 0.35 0.68 0.45 0.43 0.45 0.37 0.33 0.20 0.15 0.22 0.41 0.00 
Pennington 0.70 1.04 0.75 0.73 0.75 0.70 0.60 0.50 0.45 0.52 0.73 0.35 
Forcados 0.40 0.60 0.42 0.40 0.32 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.33 0.47 0.00 
Escravos 0.30 0.63 0.40 0.38 0.40 0.32 0.28 0.15 0.10 0.17 0.36 -0.05 
BonnyMedium 0.15 0.42 0.30 0.22 0.14 0.22 0.25 0.15 0.07 0.15 0.29 -0.17 
tpriced five days after biil of lading 
MEXICO lo FE: avg OmaniDubai 
Isthmus 0.65 0.65 0.75 0.70 0.70 0.95 0.80 0.85 0.70 0.80 0.80 0.80 
Maya -4.25 -3.85 -3.25 -3.25 -3.05 -2.50 -2.10 -1.90 -1.20 -2.40 -2.30 -2.20 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.2/page 2 Supplement 2 Jun 1996

--- Page 237/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Formula crude prices, 1995 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
SAUDI ARABIA fob Ras Tanura 
fob US: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -2.35 -2.50 -2.50 -2.25 -2.65 -2.75 -2.70 -2.65 -2.70 -2.85 -2.55 -2.80 
Arab Med -2.90 -3.20 -3.10 -2.80 -3.25 -3.45 -3.25 -3.20 -3.40 -3.60 -3.20 -3.60 
Arab Hy -3.25 -3.25 -3.50 -3.05 -3.65 -3.85 -3.45 -3.45 -3.80 -4.05 -3.55 -4.05 
Berri -1.85 -1.85 -1.85 -1.80 -2.00 -2.00 -2.10 -2.05 -2.05 -2.15 -1.95 -2.15 
cif USGC: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -1.15 -1.35 -1.30 -1.05 -1.45 -1.55 -1.50 -1.45 -1.50 -1.65 -1.35 -1.60 
Arab Med -1.70 -2.05 -1.90 -1.60 -2.05 -2.25 -2.05 -2.00 -2.20 -2.40 -2.00 -2.40 
Arab Hy -2.05 -2.50 -2.30 -1.85 -2.45 -2.65 -2.25 -2.25 -2.60 -2.85 -2.35 -2.85 
fob Europe: dtd Brent 
Arab Lt -1.15 -1.15 -1.15 -1.15 -1.15 -1.35 -1.35 -1.60 -1.50 -1.30 -1.30 -1.45 
Arab Med -1.70 -1.60 -1.70 -1.55 -1.70 -1.90 -1.90 -2.35 -2.25 -2.05 -1.95 -2.10 
Arab Hy -2.05 -1.85 -2.05 -1.80 -2.05 -2.25 -2.25 -2.80 -2.70 -2.50 -2.35 -2.50 
Berri -0.75 -0.85 -0.75 -0.85 -0.85 -1.00 -1.00 -1.15 -1.05 -0.85 -0.85 -1.00 
fob Far East: avg Oman/Dubai 
Arab Lt 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.40 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.60 
Arab Med -0.40 -0.45 -0.15 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.15 -0.05 -0.20 -0.20 -0.10 
Arab Hy -1.00 -1.10 -0.60 -1.80 -0.45 -0.55 -0.55 -0.85 -0.65 -0.70 -0.70 -0.40 
Berri 1.20 1.10 0.95 0.85 0.75 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.80 0.90 0.90 1.05 
IRAN: Oman or Dubai* 
lran Lt -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.17 -0.17 -0.07 
lran Hy -0.03 -0.03 0.22 0.29 0.29 0.29 0.29 0.19 0.29 0.07 0.07 0.17 
* for /ran Lt use Oman, for lran Hy use Dubai, fob Kharg lsland destination Far East 
KUWAIT: avg OmanlDubai 
Kuwait -0.50 -0.55 -0.25 -0.15 -0.15 -0.15 -0.15 -0.25 -0.15 -0.25 -0.30 -0.20 
fob Mina aldhmadi destination Far East 
QATAR: avg spot Oman 
Dukhan 0.61 0.59 0.55 0.45 0.37 0.23 0.26 0.31 0.38 0.44 0.42 0.32 
Marine 0.43 0.44 0.41 0.30 0.23 0.09 0.12 0.17 0.24 0.32 0.30 0.20 
NIGERIA: to dtd Brentt 
Bonny Light 0.09 0.32 0.40 0.15 0.28 0.33 0.14 0.05 0.10 0.28 0.32 0.22 
BrassRiver 0.15 0.42 0.50 0.25 0.38 0.40 0.18 0.08 0.16 0.34 0.40 0.30 
Qua lboe 0.09 0.32 0.40 0.15 0.28 0.33 0.14 0.05 0.10 0.28 0.32 0.22 
Pennington 0.45 0.72 0.75 0.55 0.78 0.68 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.50 0.55 0.47 
Forcados 0.04 0.20 0.12 0.05 0.18 0.20 0.09 0.03 0.10 0.24 0.28 0.22 
Escravos 0.04 0.27 0.35 0.10 0.26 0.30 0.09 0.00 0.06 0.24 0.28 0.20 
BonnyMedium -0.13 0.10 0.02 -0.12 0.06 0.06 0.00 0.10 -0.04 0.13 0.18 0.12 
tpriced five days after bill of lading 
MEXICO to US: to Mexlcan formula 
Isthmus -0.95 -0.95 -0.85 -0.75 -0.75 -0.90 -0.90 -1.00 -1.00 -1.00 -0.90 -0.90 
Maya -1.45 -1.35 -1.25 -1.15 -1.25 -1.35 -1.35 -1.35 -1.35 -1.65 -1.50 -1.40 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Supplement 2 Jun 1996 Appendix 4.2lpage 3

--- Page 238/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Formula crude prices, 1996 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
SAUDI ARABIA fob Ras Tanura 
fob US: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -2.60 -2.40 -240 -2.50 -2.50 -2.95 -2.85 -3.05 -3.25 -3 00 -2.85 -2.80 
Arab Med -3.30 -3.10 -3.15 -3.20 -3.35 -3.80 -3.60 -3.70 -4.05 -3.85 -3.75 -3.80 
Arab Hy -3.70 -3.55 -3 65 -3.80 -3.95 -4.40 -4.10 -4.10 -4.55 -4 40 -4.40 -4.40 
Berri -2.05 -1.85 -1.80 -1.85 -1.85 -2.25 -2.20 -2.40 -2.50 -2.20 -2.00 -2.10 
cif USGC: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -1.40 -1 20 -1 20 -1.30 -1.30 -1.75 -1.65 -1.85 -2.05 -1 80 -1.65 -1.75 
Arab Med -2.10 -1.90 -1.95 -2.00 -2.15 -2.60 -2.40 -2.50 -2.85 -2.65 -2.55 -2.60 
Arab Hy -2.50 -2.35 -245 -2.60 -2.75 -3.20 -2.90 -2.90 -3.35 -3 20 -3.20 -3.20 
fob Europe: dtd Brent 
Arab Lt -1.40 -1.10 -1.20 -1.20 -1.30 -1.40 -1.65 -1.80 -1.80 -1.70 -1.60 -1.85 
Arab Med -2.05 -1.70 -1.80 -1.90 -2.05 -2.15 -2.55 -2.70 -2.70 -2.65 -2.85 -3.05 
Arab Hy -2.40 -1.95 -2.05 -2.20 -2.35 -2.45 -2.95 -3.10 -3.10 -3.10 -3.45 -3.60 
Berri -0.95 -0.65 -0.75 -0.70 -0.70 -0.75 -0.85 -1.00 -1.00 -0.85 -0.85 -1.00 
fob Far East: avg OmanlDubai 
Arab Lt 0.60 0.60 055 0.55 0.55 0.55 0.55 0.55 0.55 0 55 0.60 0.75 
Arab Med -0.20 -0.20 -0.25 -0.35 -0.35 -0.35 -0.60 -0.50 -0.50 -0.50 -0.30 -0.30 
Arab Hy -0.55 -0.55 -0 60 -0.75 -0.75 -0.75 -1.25 -1.00 -1.20 -1 10 -1.05 -1.15 
Berri 1.20 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.55 1.85 
IRAN: Oman or Dubai’ 
Iran Lt -0.07 -0.07 -007 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0.12 -0 12 -0.12 -0.12 
Iran Hy 0.07 0.07 0.07 -0.08 -0.0s -0.08 -0.33 -0.23 -0.23 -0.13 -0.13 -0.13 
* for /ran Lt use Oman, for Iran Hy use Dubai, fob Kharg lsiand destination Far East 
KUWAIT: avg OmanlDubai 
Kuwait -0.30 -0.30 -0.35 -0.45 -0.45 -0.45 -0.70 -0.70 -0.70 -0.50 -0.40 -0.40 
fob Mina a/-Ahmadi desrinarion Far Easr 
QATAR: avg spot Oman 
Dukhan 0.37 0.40 0.16 0.17 0.26 0.21 0.28 0.33 0.55 0.61 0.69 0.68 
Marine 0.27 0.30 0.06 0.05 0.15 0.13 0.19 0.24 0.46 0.53 0.62 0.61 
NIGERIA: to dtd Bred 
Bonny Light 0.32 0.48 0.48 0.60 0.61 0.28 0.25 0.34 0.43 0.36 0.63 0.45 
Brass River 0.38 0.48 0.46 0.62 0.63 0.31 0.29 0.37 0.47 0.38 0.63 0.41 
Qua lboe 0.32 0.48 0.48 0.60 0.61 0.28 0.25 0.34 0.43 0.36 0.63 0.45 
Pennington 0.55 0.65 0.70 0.80 0.83 0.48 0.46 0.55 0.66 0.64 0.95 0.80 
Forcados 0.29 0.48 0.50 0.60 0.50 0.20 -0.05 0.17 0.23 0.36 0.70 0.50 
Escravos 0.29 0.45 0.43 0.57 0.58 0.22 0.21 0.30 0.40 0.32 0.60 0.40 
BonnyMedium 0.16 0.38 0.34 0.48 0.38 0.07 -0.17 0.05 0.10 0.28 0.63 0.40 
tpriced five days afrer bill of lading 
MEXICO to US: to Mexican formula 
Isthmus -0.80 -0.70 -0.70 -0.80 -0.70 -0.70 -0.70 -0.70 -0.70 -0.90 -1.00 -0.90 
Maya -1 55 -1.55 -1.55 -1.75 -1.60 -1.50 -1.40 -1.20 -1.10 -1.20 -1.60 -1.75 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Appendix 4.2Ipage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 239/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Formula crude prices, 1997 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
SAUDI ARABIA fob Ras Tanura 
fob US: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -2.80 -3.05 -3.30 -3.45 -3.60 
Arab Med -3.65 -3.95 -4.35 -4.50 -4.65 
Arab Hy -4.25 -4.65 -5.20 -5.35 -5.50 
Berri -1.90 -2.05 -2.15 -2.35 -2.60 
cif USGC: spot WTI 
Arab Lt -1.60 -1.85 -2.10 -2.25 -2.40 
Arab Med -2.45 -2.75 -3.15 -3.30 -3.45 
Arab Hy -3.10 -3.45 -4.00 -4.15 -4.30 
fob Europe: dtd Brent 
Arab Lt -1.85 -1.85 -1.85 -1.95 -2.25 
Arab Med -3.05 -3.05 -3.15 -3.15 
Arab Hy -3.60 -3.60 -3.80 -3.80 -4.30 
Berri -1.00 -1.00 -0.90 -1.10 -1.35 
fob Far East: avg Oman/Dubai 
Arab Lt 0.75 0.75 0.60 0.60 0.60 
Arab Med -0.30 -0.30 -0.40 -0.40 -0.50 
Arab Hy -1 .I5 -1.15 -1 25 -1 25 -1.35 
Berri 2.00 2.85 1.95 1.70 1.50 
IRAN: Oman or Dubai* 
lran Lt 0.08 0.08 -0.07 -0.07 -0.17 
lran Hy -0.03 -0.03 -0.13 -0.13 -0.23 
* for /ran Lt use Oman, for lran Hy use Dubai, fob Kharg lsland destination Far East 
KUWAIT: avg OmanlDubai 
Kuwait -0.40 -0.40 -0.50 -0.50 -0.60 
fob Mina aldhmadi destination Far East 
QATAR: avg spot Oman 
Dukhan 0.66 0.61 0.40 0.41 
Marine 0.59 0.53 0.26 0.19 
NIGERIA: to dtd Brentt 
Bonny Light 0.50 0.53 0.58 0.04 0.15 
Brass River 0.38 0.45 0.59 0.09 0.25 
Qua lboe 0.50 0.53 0.58 0.04 0.15 
Pennington 0.85 0.88 0.93 0.22 0.35 
Forcados 0.60 0.68 0.47 -0.40 -0.30 
Escravos 0.38 0.44 0.52 -0.04 0.07 
Bonny Medium 0.50 0.53 0.35 -0.50 -0.40 
tpriced five days after bill of lading 
MEXICO to US: to Mexlcan formula 
Isthmus -1 .OO -1 .OO -1.15 -1.35 -1.70 
Mava -1.75 -1.75 -1.75 -1.75 -2.25 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Supplement 3 May 1997 Appendix 4.2lpage 5

--- Page 240/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 241/964 ---
Appendix 4.3 
Spot crude prices, 1993 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NORTH SEA 
Brent 17.41 18.46 18.76 18.63 18.52 17.65 16.78 16.69 16.00 16.60 15.18 13.65 
Forties 17.46 18.60 18.88 18.70 18.36 17.58 16.84 16.78 15.84 16.46 15.06 13.68 
Flona 16.22 17.56 17.54 17.46 17.31 16.33 15.65 15.39 14.81 15.53 14.25 13.07 
Ekofisk 17.59 18.80 19.03 18.75 18.60 17.87 17.09 17.04 16.14 16.70 15.21 13.75 
Oseberg 17.55 18.64 18.88 18.61 18.51 17.73 16.92 16.87 16.01 16.61 15.20 13.81 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Uralscif Med 15.60 16.87 16.97 16.81 16.64 15.86 15.14 15.04 14.28 15.26 13.95 12.68 
Es Sider 16.94 17.91 18.23 18.13 17.96 17.08 16.19 16.18 15.45 16.00 14.55 13.05 
Suez Blend 15.05 15.36 15.29 15.19 14.22 13.46 13.59 13.01 13.73 12.44 11.11 
Iran Hvy SK 14.75 15.59 15.91 15.87 15.73 14.75 13.99 14.19 13.69 14.45 13.14 12.06 
Syrian Lt 
WEST AFRICA 
Bonny Lt 17.88 19.14 19.45 19.22 19.06 18.27 17.51 17.24 16.45 17.09 15.76 14.14 
Bonny Med 17.35 18.55 18.95 18.88 18.79 17.86 17.07 16.97 16.26 16.91 15.54 14.02 
Forcados 17.52 18.71 19.14 19.05 19.03 18.08 17.26 17.20 16.47 17.17 15.81 14.23 
Brass River 19.35 19.63 19.35 19.20 18.36 17.59 17.35 16.59 17.26 15.97 14.35 
Gabinda 15.87 17.12 17.47 17.69 17.91 16.58 15.54 15.35 14.76 15.41 13.77 12.14 
ARAB GULF 
Dubai 15.33 16.01 16.36 16.36 16.05 15.69 14.34 14.78 14.20 14.85 13.79 12.28 
Oman 16.12 16.83 17.24 17.09 16.92 16.45 15.24 15.45 14.84 15.41 14.33 12.62 
Murban 17.30 18.12 18.43 18.09 17.73 17.33 16.28 16.77 16.41 16.75 15.86 14.10 
FAR EAST 
Tapis 19.01 19.71 20.97 20.76 20.14 19.25 18.87 19.00 18.41 18.29 17.06 15.66 
Minas 18.22 18.56 19.96 20.47 20.61 19.26 17.71 17.46 16.30 16.26 15.29 14.17 
Duri 16.04 16.30 17.27 17.75 17.93 16.40 14.75 13.93 13.23 13.83 12.47 10.69 
Gippsland 18.29 18.85 20.02 19.96 19.33 18.28 18.06 17.80 17.18 16.93 15.88 14.25 
Kutubu Lt 18.95 20.06 19.90 19.22 18.17 17.83 17.60 17.06 16.85 16.01 14.44 
Widuri 17.67 17.91 19.22 19.94 20.17 18.77 17.01 16.41 15.03 14.84 13.77 12.58 
UNITED STATES 
WTI Cushing 19.06 20.06 20.32 20.26 19.95 19.06 17.87 18.01 17.52 18.14 16.57 14.47 
WTI Midland 18.97 20.03 20.27 20.18 19.87 19.00 17.91 18.11 17.46 18.08 16.47 14.43 
WTS 17.31 18.70 18.71 18.62 18.61 17.65 16.41 16.16 16.00 16.45 14.91 13.11 
LLS St James 19.13 20.17 20.30 20.24 20.10 19.21 18.05 18.25 17.74 18.34 16.76 14.70 
ANS USGC 16.57 17.88 18.37 18.42 18.00 17.02 15.83 16.20 15.60 16.05 14.23 12.24 
Bonny LtUS 19.05 20.34 20.61 20.46 20.22 19.34 18.58 18.33 17.47 18.12 16.83 15.20 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. 
Appendix 4.3lpage 1

--- Page 242/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Spot crude prices, 1994 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NORTH SEA 
Brent 14.23 13.78 13.83 15.03 16.14 16.74 17.59 16.81 15.87 16.49 17.16 15.92 
Forties 14.33 13.83 13.98 15.18 16.14 16.65 17.47 1664 15.78 16.56 17.25 15.95 
Flotta 13.76 13.11 13.43 14.55 15.40 16.04 16.63 16.07 15.19 15.99 16.84 16.10 
Ekofisk 14.43 13.95 14.06 15.25 16.31 16.78 17.57 16.82 15.92 16.58 17.34 15.98 
Oseberg 14.48 13.98 14.09 15.25 16.24 16.72 17.53 16.76 15.84 16.62 17.38 15.93 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Uralscif Med 13.63 13.18 13.38 14.46 15.27 15.97 16.53 16.01 15.24 16.13 17.06 15.80 
Es Sider 13.77 13.48 13.59 14.95 16.06 16.40 17.08 16.23 15.41 16.25 17.11 15.94 
SuezBlend 11.98 11.68 11.96 13.30 14.16 14.80 15.58 1490 14.11 14.85 15.75 14.57 
Iran Hvy SK 12.94 12.48 12.88 14.20 15.08 15.66 16.25 15.52 14.69 15.47 16.40 15.24 
Syrian Lt 15.55 16.09 17.06 15.90 
WEST AFRICA 
Bonny Lt 14.85 14.40 14.35 15.50 16.70 17.14 17.89 17 04 16.09 16.95 17.49 16.09 
Bonny Med 14.63 14.17 14.21 15.32 16.48 17.09 17.85 16.94 16.07 16.83 17.35 15.84 
Forcados 14.81 14.34 14.37 15.45 16.66 17.28 18.08 17.20 16.26 17.00 17.50 16.00 
Brass River 15.03 14.54 14.44 15.64 16.84 17.20 17.93 17.01 16.13 17.01 17.55 16.14 
Cabinda 13.08 13.04 13.16 14.39 15.45 15.87 16.64 1606 15.06 15.60 16.31 14.98 
ARAB GULF 
Dubai 13.17 12.78 12.17 13.72 14.76 15.83 16.47 15.85 15.42 15.41 16.08 15.58 
Oman 13.48 13.48 12.67 13.89 15.09 16.09 16.85 16.45 15.84 15.88 16.57 16.31 
Murban 15.10 15.01 14.11 15.25 16.26 17.01 17.63 17.13 16.99 17.19 17.84 17.29 
FAR EAST 
Tapis 16.18 16.60 15.90 16.01 16.80 17.74 18.68 18.70 17.61 17.56 17.46 17.10 
Minas 14.58 15.26 13.93 14.35 15.53 16.56 18.94 19.76 16.87 16.52 16.28 16.48 
Duri 11.36 12.19 11.49 11.93 13.18 14.15 16.64 17.93 16.15 15.62 15.90 15.59 
Gippsland 14.67 15.08 14.88 15.11 16.04 16.87 17.88 17.85 16.81 16.77 16.71 16.28 
Kutubu Lt 14.91 15.26 14.78 15.03 15.89 16.75 17.81 17.80 16.73 16.41 16.38 16.15 
Widuri 13.31 14.02 13.01 13.50 14.73 15.63 18.18 20.04 16.93 15.75 15.80 15.79 
UNITED STATES 
WTI Gushing 15.04 14.75 14.67 16.35 17.90 19.06 19.66 18.38 17.44 17.71 18.08 17.18 
WTI Midland 15.03 14.79 14.69 16.25 17.79 18.80 19.41 18.32 17.29 17.54 18.10 17.12 
WTS 13.97 13.98 13.89 15.47 17.03 17.83 18.30 17.37 16.35 16.73 17.40 16.45 
LLS St James 15.29 14.98 15.00 16.66 18.01 18.40 19.11 18.36 17.37 17.79 18.40 17.42 
ANS USGC 13.30 13.66 13.72 15.33 16.81 16.97 17.46 16.84 15.98 15.90 16.82 15.95 
Bonny Lt US 15.90 15.26 15.43 16.72 17.70 18.21 18.88 17.92 16.97 na na na 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. 
Appendix 4.3lpage 2 Supplement 2 Jun 1996

--- Page 243/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Spot crude prices, 1995 
$/barrel Jan Feb 
NORTH SEA 
Brent 16.56 17.07 
Forties 16.64 17.13 
Flona 16.18 16.62 
Ekofisk 16.67 17.13 
0seberg 16.69 17.15 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Urals cif Med 16.67 16.65 
Es Sider 16.64 17.18 
Suez Blend 15.48 16.10 
Iran Hvy SK 16.00 16.31 
Syrian Lt 16.56 16.78 
WEST AFRICA Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
17.00 18.64 18.31 17.30 15.85 16.09 16.70 16.12 16.84 17.91 
17.05 18.85 18.40 17.51 15.94 16.21 16.93 16.31 17.05 18.11 
16.66 18.32 17.85 16.83 15.20 15.53 16.28 15.66 16.40 17.55 
17.13 18.87 18.49 17.57 15.99 16.25 16.93 16.29 17.03 18.08 
17.11 18.91 18.49 17.54 15.94 16.23 16.91 16.27 17.05 18.16 
16.85 18.25 17.97 16.79 14.85 15.46 16.31 15.56 16.34 17.73 
16.98 18.64 18.27 17.29 15.57 15.82 16.56 15.99 16.76 17.92 
16.07 17.64 16.97 15.92 14.05 14.57 15.47 14.38 15.08 16.37 
16.37 18.25 17.97 16.79 14.28 14.65 15.49 14.86 15.62 16.90 
16.70 18.29 18.00 16.98 15.16 15.50 16.35 15.81 16.52 17.80 
Bonny Lt 
Bonny Med 16.63 17.21 
Forcados 16.83 17.36 
Brass River 16.93 17.58 
Cabinda 15.88 16.60 
ARAB GULF 
Dubai 16.07 16.73 
Oman 16.68 17.20 
Murban 17.57 18.18 
FAR EAST 
Tapis 18.54 18.83 
Minas 17.51 18.96 
Duri 16.15 16.67 
Gippsland 17.62 17.99 
Kutubu Lt 17.46 17.95 
Widuri 16.45 18.01 
UNITED STATES 
WTI Cushing 18.02 18.55 
WTI Midland 17.93 18.28 
WTS 17.18 17.47 
LLS St James 18.30 18.64 
ANS USGC 16.85 17.40 
Brent USGC 17.61 18.05 16.88 17.52 17.27 18.95 18.70 17.53 15.95 16.35 17.13 16.50 17.21 18.35 
16.89 18.67 18.43 17.31 15.82 16.19 16.93 16.30 17.00 18.17 
17.04 18.82 18.56 17.44 15.96 16.33 17.05 16.44 17.19 18.34 
17.33 19.02 18.77 17.56 16.01 16.41 17.19 16.56 17.25 18.37 
16.54 18.20 17.84 16.48 14.90 15.33 16.03 15.42 16.21 17.22 
16.33 17.40 17.30 16.17 15.04 15.41 15.54 14.90 15.64 16.91 
16.77 17.74 17.55 16.40 15.31 15.61 15.73 15.04 15.94 17.41 
17.43 18.43 18.30 17.05 15.82 16.29 16.70 16.13 17.21 18.53 
18.40 19.02 19.32 18.37 17.32 17.47 17.49 17.26 18.03 19.29 
18.90 18.43 18.86 17.25 16.06 16.53 16.72 16.63 17.17 18.55 
15.92 16.38 17.40 17.04 15.91 15.52 15.11 14.63 15.19 16.96 
17.77 18.40 18.78 17.99 17.03 17.09 17.14 16.91 17.48 18.63 
17.75 18.44 18.92 18.03 17.01 17.08 17.03 16.65 17.29 18.30 
18.20 17.87 18.29 17.12 15.58 16.04 16.17 15.97 16.55 17.83 
18.53 19.87 19.74 18.43 17.31 18.02 18.21 17.43 17.99 19.03 
18.27 19.82 19.62 18.46 17.34 17.81 18.01 17.32 17.78 18.83 
17.57 19.14 19.02 17.71 16.49 16.88 16.87 16.12 16.68 17.83 
18.45 20.1 7 19.97 18.67 17.40 17.85 18.14 17.66 18.32 19.53 
17.36 18.79 18.69 17.36 16.21 16.74 16.76 15.84 16.54 17.67 
17.93 19.59 19.34 18.24 17.00 17.29 17.70 17.18 17.80 18.96 
Source: Perroleurn Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using quoted days only. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 Appendix 4.3lpage 3

--- Page 244/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Spot crude prices, 1996 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NORTH SEA 
Brent 17.88 17.98 19.85 20.88 19.16 18.45 19.60 20.51 22.56 24.14 22.72 23.82 
Forties 18.17 18.40 20.47 21.36 19.56 18.77 19.90 20 80 22.81 24.51 22.91 24.20 
Flotta 17.52 17.60 19.68 20.63 18.85 17.90 18.98 20.02 22.17 23.56 22.02 23.35 
Ekofisk 18.18 18.52 20.56 21.40 19.60 18.83 19.97 20.86 22.82 24.42 22.85 24.07 
Oseberg 18.31 18.62 20.55 21.37 19.57 18.74 19.89 20.78 22.83 24.55 22.99 24.25 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Urals cif Med 18.01 17.86 19.77 20.19 18.43 17.27 18.56 19.76 21.77 23.45 22.08 23.27 
Es Sider 18.01 18.12 20.03 21.03 19.16 18.37 19.45 20.35 22.45 24.16 22.80 23.91 
Suez Blend 16.48 16.52 18.34 19.06 17.22 15.95 17.12 18 20 20.29 21.91 20.45 21.60 
Iran Hvy SK 17.24 17.26 19.10 19.75 17.76 16.58 17.68 18.90 20.92 22.58 21.17 22.44 
Syrian Lt 18.02 18.01 19.92 20.64 18.78 17.83 18.90 20.02 22.23 23.96 22.68 23.75 
WEST AFRICA 
Bonny Lt 18.45 18.58 20.56 21.52 19.58 18.82 20.05 21 00 23.04 24.82 23.18 24.43 
Bonny Med 18.31 18.44 20.45 21.32 19.32 18.46 19.72 20.69 22.91 24.74 23.15 24.44 
Forcados 18.46 18.61 20.54 21.42 19.45 18.56 19.85 20.84 23.04 24.87 23.31 24.56 
Brass River 18.44 18.58 20.57 21 55 19.63 18.89 20.09 21.02 23.06 24.79 23.13 24.29 
Cabinda 17.40 17.52 19.45 20.39 18.58 17.88 19.07 1999 21.71 22.96 21.36 22.95 
ARAB GULF 
Dubai 16.52 15.90 16.90 17.63 16.95 17.27 17.76 18.60 20.32 21.71 20.93 21.70 
Oman 17.27 16.72 17.70 18.56 17.95 18.31 18.76 19.65 21.27 22.49 21.81 22.84 
Murban 18.45 17.87 18.64 19.32 18.68 19.15 19.65 20.51 22.31 23.98 23.44 24.59 
FAR EAST 
Tapis 21.03 20.53 20.51 20.45 20.07 20.33 20.68 20.94 22.71 25.82 24.77 25.28 
Minas 20.27 19.51 19.39 19.25 19.08 19.51 19.87 19.32 20.57 23.06 22.82 23.45 
Duri 18.67 17.88 18.33 18.46 19.03 18.84 18.58 17.93 19.33 21.62 21.29 21.93 
Gippsland 19.94 20.00 19.97 20.02 20.08 20.05 20.44 20.89 22.58 25.44 24.60 25.24 
Kutubu Lt 20.27 19.87 19.64 19.51 19.34 19.42 19.63 19.91 21.74 24.74 23.88 24.28 
Widuri 19.49 19.00 18.90 18.67 18.27 18.67 19.21 18.59 19.88 22.19 21.94 22.48 
AMERICAS 
WTI Cushing 18.87 19.03 21.31 23.51 21.18 20.42 21.29 21.92 24.00 24.90 23.75 25.36 
WTI Midland 18.90 19.02 21.15 23.30 21.01 20.26 21.24 21.97 24.06 24.94 23.78 25.32 
WTS 17.98 18.24 20.54 22.46 20.03 19.07 19.93 20.60 22.78 23.49 21.87 23.77 
LLS St James 19.58 19.54 21.38 23.05 20.95 20.02 21.06 22.07 24.21 25.52 24.53 25.88 
Brent USGC 18.99 19.06 21.10 21.91 20.03 19.54 20.72 21.63 23.76 25.15 23.71 25.01 
Oriente 17.41 17.87 20.31 22.08 19.43 18.58 18.88 19.65 22.11 22.43 20.93 22.62 
CaAo Limon 17.36 17.52 19.40 20.78 18.99 17.90 18.86 19.84 22.21 23.29 22.04 23.46 
Cusiana 18.53 18.40 20.11 21.56 19.93 19.20 23.31 21.15 23.44 24.71 23.63 25.11 
ANS USWC 17.30 18.01 20.26 22.02 19.37 18.92 19.69 19.99 21.65 22.56 21.48 23.58 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using quoted days on&. 
Appendix 4.3lpage 4 Supplement 3 May 1997

--- Page 245/964 ---
4 Crude oil markets 
Spot crude prices, 1997 
$/barrel Jan Feb 
NORTH SEA 
Brent 23.55 20.92 
Forties 23.94 21.37 
Flotta 23.03 20.31 
Ekofisk 23.78 21.24 
Oseberg 23.96 21.23 
MEDITERRANEAN 
Urals cif Med 22.68 20.06 
Es Sider 23.49 20.78 
Suez Blend Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
19.15 17.61 
19 29 17.67 
18.25 16.55 
19.27 17.67 
19.12 17.59 
17.97 16.45 
18.99 17.21 
Iran Hvy SK 
Syrian Lt 23.20 20.57 
WEST AFRICA 
Bonny Lt 24.21 21.55 
Bonny Med 24.20 21.45 
Forcados 24.28 21.49 
Brass River 24.12 21.58 
Cabinda 22.90 20.18 
ARAB GULF 21.22 18.50 16 49 14.84 
21.77 19.17 17.12 15.47 
18.38 16.69 
19 40 17-90 
19.09 17.42 
19.06 17.48 
19.41 17.93 
17 79 16.36 
Dubai 21.44 18.77 18.18 16.77 
Oman 22.69 19.90 19.20 17.68 
Murban 24.32 21.14 20.34 18.70 
FAR EAST 
Tapis 26.07 23.32 22.07 20.80 
Minas 24.65 21.98 18.82 18.17 
Duri 22.86 20.46 17.23 16.43 
Gippsland 26.03 23.32 22.07 20.80 
Kutubu Lt 24.90 22.41 21.40 20.01 
Widuri 23.62 21.09 18.14 17.33 
AMERICAS 
WTI Gushing 25.13 22.18 20.98 19.70 
WTI Midland 24.88 21.78 20.65 19.39 
WTS 23.48 19.80 18.37 17.69 
LLS St James 25.31 22.43 20.82 19.50 
Brent USGC 24.61 22.03 20.16 18.76 
Oriente 22.35 19.05 17.06 15.88 
CaAo Limon 23.64 20.06 18.04 16.24 
Cusiana 24.38 21.50 20.20 18.15 
ANS USWC 23.58 21.02 20.11 18.47 
Source: Pefroieum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using quoted days only. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 Appendix 4.3/page 5

--- Page 246/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 247/964 ---
Appendix 4.4 
Further reading 
Petroleum Argus Oil Market Guides 
A series of occasional booklets providing detailed coverage of 
the main international crude and products markets, 
explaining how they operate, the methods of pricing, and the 
trading instruments used in each region. 
Middle East Crude Oil Pricing 
1st edition, October 1991; 2nd edition, 1996 (forthcoming) 
Guide to the US Crude Market 
1st edition, May 1992; 2nd edition, 1996 
Guide to the Fur East Crude Market 
2nd edition, June 1993 
Guide to the North Sea Crude Murket 
1st edition, 1997 (forthcoming) 
Newsletters 
The former Weekly Petroleum Argus (WPA) has been 
expanded into two publications, each with a more clearly 
defined focus. 
Argus Global Murkets (AGMj now provides a topical and 
intelligent editorial on the market; news and analysis of 
latest developments; crude, product and futures market 
reviews; background history to set current prices in context; 
freight rates and oil market fundamentals. 
The new Weekly Petroleum Argus covers upstream and 
downstream investment; corporate strategy and profiles; 
mergers and acquisitions; oil and gas finance and the 
geopolitics of energy. 
Supplement 3 May 1997 Appendix 4.4/page 1

--- Page 248/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 249/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Petroleum Argus 
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 Europe 
5.2.1 Gasoline 
5.2.2 Naphtha 
5.2.3 Jet kerosine 
5.2.4 Gasoil 
5.2.5 Residual fuel oil 
5.3 United States 
5.3.1 Gasoline 
5.3.2 Distillate fuel oil 
5.3.3 Jet fuel 
5.3.4 Residual fuel oil 
5.3.5 Vacuum gasoil 
5.3.6 Other products 
5.3.7 West coast markets 
5.4 Asia Pacific 
5.4.1 Gasoline 
5.4.2 Naphtha 
5.4.3 Jet kerosine 
5.4.4 Gasoil 
5.4.5 Low sulphur waxy residue 
5.4.6 Residual fuel oil 
Appendix 
5.1 Spot product prices 
5.2 Further reading

--- Page 250/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 251/964 ---
5.1 Introduction 
Refined product markets differ from crude in several respects. 
First, the scale of operation is usually much smaller. A typical 
crude deal involves 500,000 or even 1,000,000 barrels of oil, while a 
typical product deal might only involve 5,000 or 10,000 barrels. As 
a result, the sums of money at stake are considerably lower. 
Secondly, quality is paramount. Refiners not only expect -but are 
used to coping with -variations in crude oil quality and these 
would not undermine the viability of a deal. Refined products must 
meet very stringent quality specifications if they are to be sold to 
final consumers and the delivery of an off-spec cargo would be 
regarded as a breach of contract. Rigorous quality tests therefore 
form an important part of any transaction involving refined 
products. Finally, there are many more opportunities for arbitrage 
in the products market. Price differentials between the various 
grades of refined product are constantly shifting -either at the 
same location, or thousands of miles away -and many traders 
make a steady living from breaking bulk, blending grades, or 
moving cargoes around the world. 
No refiner or marketer is able to operate a completely balanced 
system and the primary function of the products market is to 
... . .. . Gasoline, NY Harbor - Naphtha, Arab Gulf 
____ JeVkerosine, Singapore - HSFO, Arab Gulf 
Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 Jan 98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.1 North-west Europe: refined product arbitrage 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 S.l/page 1

--- Page 252/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
redistribute the individual surpluses and deficits that inevitably 
arise at each location. As a result, the broad structure of the refined 
products market depends on the interaction between the 
composition of the demand barrel, the mix of refinery capacity, and 
the type of crude oil being run in each of the major geographical 
regions. Although these patterns change over time, there are 
regular flows of product from one region to another and the market 
sets relative price levels accordingly (see Fig. 5.1). Europe, for 
example, exports gasoline to the US and gasoil to the Far East, but 
imports naphtha and fuel oil for use as refinery feedstocks. The US 
exports distillates to South America and the Far East. And the mid- 
east Gulf is a net exporter of naphtha and fuel oil to both the Far 
East and Europe. 
In recent years, there have been a number of significant shifts 
in the pattern of world product trade that have affected the 
relationship between prices in the different refining centres. The 
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990 destroyed several highly 
sophisticated refineries in the mid-east Gulf, temporarily removing 
an important source of light and middle distillate exports to both 
Europe and the Far East. This shortfall was replaced by US 
refiners who had been investing heavily in new upgrading plant 
and were able to increase their yields of distillate products much 
faster than they had anticipated. As a result, the US became a net 
exporter of middle distillates, after years of being a net importer. 
But US refiners are now running close to full capacity, creating 
opportunities for refiners in Europe and Latin America to export 
growing volumes of gasoline and gasoline blending components to 
the huge US market. 
Recently, the sudden collapse of Asian demand has reversed 
the flow of product trade between east and west. After being a net 
importer of refined products across the barrel for many years as 
demand growth outpaced the expansion of refinery capacity, the 
Asia Pacific region now finds that it has a product surplus which is 
being exported to Europe, Latin America and the US west coast 
when the arbitrage is open. 
5.lipage 2 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 253/964 ---
5.2 Europe 
The European products market is one of the largest and most 
sophisticated in the world. European countries consumed some 15.8 
million b/d of oil products in 1997, of which 13.2 million b/d was 
consumed in the fifteen countries of the European Union (EU). 
Europe is also an important swing refining centre. There is 
nearly 17 million b/d of crude distillation capacity in Europe, 
including almost 3 million b/d in eastern Europe. With a large 
number of relatively sophisticated refineries it is able to import low 
quality feedstocks such as straight run fuel oil and naphtha, 
principally from Russia and the Middle East, and turn them into 
high quality products such as gasoline and jet fuel for export. 
The greatest concentration of ref~ng capacity in Europe is to 
be found in the Amsterdam-Rotterdam-Antwerp (a) region of the 
Netherlands and Belgium where there is nearly 2 million b/d of 
capacity. The four main consuming markets of Europe are 
Germany, France, Italy and the UK which, together, accounted for 
65 per cent of EU(15) oil demand and 54 per cent of total demand in 
Europe in 1997. As a result, there is an active international trade 
in oil products within Europe. 
In northern Europe, physical trade is based on Rotterdam 
which is strategically placed at the mouth of the mine river and a 
major refining centre in its own right. While in southern Europe, 
physical trade is based on Genoa. Prices are typically quoted on 
both an fob and cif basis for a wide i’ange of imported and exported 
cargoes, and Rotterdam also has an active fob barge market trading 
much smaller quantities between refiners and for inland delivery. 
Table 5.1 OECD Europe product supply and demand, 1997 
Product Consumption+ Refinery output* Net imports 
million b/d million bld million bld 
Gasoline 2.98 3.49 -0.38 
Naphtha 1.13 1.07 0.19 
Kerosine 0.93 0.98 0.00 
GasoiUDiesel 5.13 5.02 0.13 
Fuel oil 1.94 2.06 0.01 
Total 13.40 13.65 0.14 
Source: IEA, OECD Quarterly Oil & Gas Statistics f iml bunkers *ex1 fuel 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2fpage 1

--- Page 254/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
5.2.1 Gasoline 
Over the last few years, unleaded gasoline has taken a growing 
share of the European market and premium unleaded gasoline 
(Eurograde) is now the most actively traded grade (see Table 5.2). 
But the market remains unstandardised with significant differences 
between the specifications of gasoline consumed in European countries 
and in the major export markets. The key specifications are octane -
expressed as Research Octane Number (RON) and Motor Octane 
Number (MON) -vapour pressure and, increasingly, benzene (see 
Section 2.4.3). In Italy, the benzene content for gasoline will be 
restricted to a maximum of one per cent from July 1998. The rest of 
the European Union is expected to follow suit. 
Premium leaded and regular unleaded gasoline are also 
important as they still have a large market share in some European 
countries (see Table 5.2). Germany is a major consumer of regular 
unleaded and Italy and Spain are major consumers of premium 
leaded gasoline. In addition, the Motor Octane Number (MON) of 
gasoline varies from country to country. Also European refiners 
need to meet export quality standards and much tighter US 
gasoline specifications mean that refiners must decide in advance 
which market they intend to supply. The most important difference 
is the requirement to use oxygenates such as MTBE to comply with 
US gasoline emission controls (see Section 5.3.1). 
Table 5.2Breakdown, ofgasohe sales in Europe, 1997 
Premium Superplus Eurograde Regular 
% share leaded unleaded unleaded unleaded 
98RON 98RON 95RON 91RON 
Austria - 15 51 34 Belgium 21 38 41 -
Denmark *17 17 52 14 
Finland �13 15 72 -
France 39 42 19 -
Germany - 6 57 37 
Greece 59 2 39 -
Ireland 28 4 68 -
Italy 49 - 51 -
Luxembourg 12 36 48 4 
Netherlands �9 13 78 -
Portugal 53 19 28 -
Spain 59 11 30 -
Sweden “20 - 80 -
Switzerland 9 6 85 -
United Kingdom 28 2 70 -
Europe *2 24 11 53 11 
Source: OPAL, Oil Price Assessments Ltd * lead replacement gasoline (LRG) 
5.2ipage 2 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 255/964 ---
5 Product markets 
10 Cargoes, Regular Unleaded 
0 
CIF NY Harbor = 0 
-1 0 
mc 
6 -20 x 
-30 
-40 
-50 
Jan90 Jan91 Jan92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.2 Gasoline: north-west Europe minus NYHarbor @es 
The European gasoline market is affected by seasonal factors. 
Consumption peaks in the summer, but the market is most active 
in the spring when the change from winter to summer 
specifications prompts refiners to turn over their inventories. 
Spring can also be the peak period for trans-Atlantic trade. The US 
is a net importer of gasoline and refiners, particularly in northwest 
Europe, are major suppliers if the arbitrage is profitable. Trans-
Atlantic freight costs for a 30,000 tonne cargo of gasoline are of the 
order of 5 cents/US gallon ($18/tonne). But the differential would 
need to be wider if the European refiner was aiming specifically for 
the reformulated gasoline (RFG) market (see Fig. 5.2). Most 
European gasoline exports to the US are either used as blending 
components or sold into non-RFG markets. The Conoco refinery in 
the UK is one of the very few plants that can actually manufacture 
RFG for the US market. 
Cargo sizes for European grades are much smaller than trans- 
Atlantic cargoes. In NW Europe, typical traded cargo sizes are 
10,000 tonnes, in the Mediterranean cargo sizes are around 20,000 
tonnes and transAtlantic cargoes are usually 30,000 tonnes but 
can be bigger. A shortage of catalytic cracking capacity in southern 
Europe -caused by the move to lower lead content and therefore a 
higher octane number -has created the opportunity for large 
volumes of gasoline to be exported from north-west Europe into 
southern Europe, reversing the traditional flow of gasoline trade in 
the region. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2tpage 3

--- Page 256/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Regular unleaded gasoline produced by southern European 
refiners is also well suited to the US market. However, the US 
market operates under different constraints to the European 
market and even standard measurements such as octane can be 
different. Octane in the US, for example, is measured by an average 
of RON and MON numbers -premium gasoline is now universally 
93((RON+MON)/2) and regular gasoline is 87((RON+MON)/2). 
Export grades are usually referred to by their US Colonial Pipeline 
codes, e.g. Al, M3, V5. Gasoline grades are given different letters to 
differentiate between conventional and reformulated gasoline, 
octane number and oxygen content. Numbers are then added to 
distinguish between the RVP and oxygen content required at 
different times of year (see Section 5.3.1). 
In addition to the European gasoline cargo markets, there is 
an active market on barges of 1,000 tonnes and 2,000 tonnes along 
the river Rhine. Product is moved from ARA refineries and storage 
facilities to distributors in Germany, the Benelux countries and 
Switzerland. The barge market in Rotterdam can slow to a trickle if 
gasoline prices in Germany are lower than those in Rotterdam or if 
Rhine water levels are either too low or too high to allow barge 
traffic. There is also an active gasoline barge swaps market (see 
Chapter 10). 
5.2.2 Naphtha 
Europe has a well developed petrochemical industry and a large 
number of sophisticated refineries specialising in the production of 
gasoline. As a result there is a ready market for both naphtha with 
a high paraffinic content, which is preferred as a feedstock for 
ethylene crackers, and naphtha with a high naphthenic and 
aromatic content (N+A), which is preferred as a feedstock for 
reformers to make gasoline (see Fig. 5.3). 
The European naphtha market is based on imported cargoes, 
mainly from simple hydroskimming refineries in North Africa and 
the Middle East. The market is dominated by Algeria, but supplies 
also come from Egypt, Libya, Greece and Syria. In the Middle East, 
Saudi Arabia and Bahrain are the main exporters. Occasionally, 
Venezuelan material is exported if the arbitrage is profitable. 
Russian supplies once dominated the market in Europe, but traded 
volumes have fallen sharply as the volume and consistency of 
Russian product has deteriorated. 
Cargo trading in the Mediterranean is largely conducted on an 
fob basis, with prices quoted at the major loading ports in Algeria, 
Libya and Egypt. This material is then sold as a cif (delivered) 
cargo into the petrochemical and refining centres of the south of 
5.2ipage 4 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 257/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Cargoes, CIF NWE 
.... . . . 98 RON 0.15 Pb 
~ 91 RON Unleaded -95 RON Unleaded 
Jan90 Jan91 Jan92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.3 Gasoline minus naphtha prices 
France and north-west Europe. Trade also occurs into the Italian 
ports of Genoa, Priolo and Venice, either for petrochemical 
processing or pipeline shipment to the petrochemical and refinery 
companies of Germany. 
Cargo trading in north-west Europe is largely conducted on a 
cif basis and an active market has developed for price swaps 
between the traders, refiners and petrochemical companies that 
buy and sell naphtha (see Chapter 10). The swaps market has 
replaced the former "forward" market which was judged too 
inflexible as a hedging tool (see Chapter 7). Barge trading in the 
ARA range is less active than the cargo market since buyers 
typically want much larger quantities. 
European naphtha imports are dominated by high paraffinic 
grades from Algeria, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain and from 
refineries in Greece. Supplies of high N+A naphtha are imported 
from refineries in Libya and Syria. Algeria also exports a modest 
amount of full range material from the refinery at Arzew, and full 
range naphtha is also imported into Europe from Egypt and 
Tunisia. 
5.2.3 Jet kerosine 
Europe is a net exporter of jet kerosine and so the market is largely 
based on fob cargoes. The main exporters in north-west Europe are 
refiners in the ARA region, but the bulk of the spot supply comes 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2fpage 5

--- Page 258/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
\ Cargoes, CIF NW Europe 
-Jet -IPE differential 
$1 43itonne 
10 t 
Nearby IPE gasoil futures = 0 
04 
Jan90 Jan91 Jan92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE 
Figure 5.4 Jet kerosine minus nearby IPE gasoil futures prices 
from Mediterranean refiners, especially those based in the Italian 
islands. The market tends to be very secretive since the number of 
buyers is relatively restricted and the quantities involved can be 
very large. As a result, prices can be volatile and companies often 
use price swaps based on Platt’s quotations to hedge their 
purchases and sales (see Chapter 10). Jet kerosine price swaps are 
traded at a differential to the nearby IPE gasoil futures contract 
(see Fig. 5.4). 
There are basically two types of jet kerosine, DERD 2494 or 
JP1 and dual purpose kerosine (DPK). European Union (EU) 
countries insist that jet fuel for aviation use must conform to the 
DERD 2494 specification and have a refinery guarantee certificate. 
DERD 2494 specifications include sulphur content (max 0.3 per 
cent), flashpoint (min 38"C), freezing point (max 47"C), density (at 
15"C, min 0.775, max 0.840) and cetane index (38). In winter, jet 
fuel can be used for blending purposes to improve the cold 
properties of gasoil. 
DPK can be used as blending stock or for domestic heating if it 
has the appropriate smoke point and colour. Algerian jet can be 
used both as aviation fuel and as heating fuel as it conforms to the 
specifications for both. Russian jet fuel does not have the necessary 
certificate to qualify as DERD 2494 and is used as a blendstock in 
the Rotterdam region. As with other products from Russian 
refineries, the quality is variable and this lowers its value relative 
to jet from other sources. 
5.2ipage 6 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 259/964 ---
5 Product markets 
The majority of jet kerosine in Europe is traded under long 
term contracts between refiners and European consumers. There is, 
however, an export spot market for jet kerosine based around 
refineries in the Mediterranean. Buying interest comes principally 
from northwest Europe. Arbitrage opportunities also open to the 
Far East and, occasionally, the US Gulf. Price volatility in the 
Mediterranean spot jet kerosine market tends to be high. 
5.2.4 Gasoil 
Gasoil is used extensively throughout Europe as a fuel for domestic 
central heating systems, particularly in Germany. But growing 
demand for diesel as an automotive fuel means that this is now the 
largest market overall (see Table 5.3). 
Product quality standards for heating gasoil and automotive 
diesel have become much more stringent in recent years and the 
market is increasingly fragmented as blending opportunities are 
constrained. Environmental controls on air pollution reduced the 
maximum sulphur content of European gasoil to 0.2 per cent from 
the end of 1994 and specifications for diesel were tightened further 
in October 1996, limiting sulphur content to 0.05 per cent. In 
winter, cold properties such as cloud point, pour point and cold 
filter plugging point become important especially for diesel, and 
gasoil with good cold properties usually commands a premium. 
Table 5.3Breakdown of gasoil sales in Europe, 1996 
Automotive Other Automotive 
diesel gasoil diesel 
'000 b/d '000 b/d share 
Austria 52 50 51%) 
Belgium 86 132 39%) 
Denmark 42 44 49%) 
Finland 31 48 39%) 
France 471 390 55%) 
Gcrmnny 478 834 36%) 
Greece 50 67 43%) 
Irclnnd 18 27 40%) 
Italy 315 171 65%) 
Luxcmbourg 12 8 62%) 
Netherlands 95 37 72% 
Norway 26 47 35% 
Portugal 51 17 75% 
Spain 185 206 47% 
Sweden 40 76 34% 
United Kingdom 
European 15 + Norway 293 
2,224 169 
2,322 63% 
49% 
Source: Eurostat 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2fpage 7

--- Page 260/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
25 
Cargoes, CIF NW Europe 
-French heating oil 
20 ~Russian gasoil -- French diesel (O.O5%S) 
15 
mc 
6 10 0.3%S 
5 
5 
0 
Nearbv IPE futures = 0 
-5 1 
Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 Jan 98 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE 
Figure 5.5 Gasoil minus nearby IPE gasoil futures prices 
All European refiners produce gasoil as part of their 
mainstream operations, but imports remain an important source of 
supply, especially for gasoil with good cold properties that can be 
blended to make winter grade diesel. The main sources of gasoil 
imports are Russia and Algeria. In the past, Russian gasoil 
provided the foundation for Europe's first and most active forward 
paper contract (see Chapter 71, but liquidity collapsed in 1993/94 
after exports became erratic and the IPE gasoil futures contract has 
replaced it as a price marker (see Fig. 5.5). 
Russian gasoil is no longer as valuable to the western 
European market as its sulphur content -0.2 per cent -makes it 
a less attractive blendstock for diesel. Its value is expected to 
decrease further as the market for ultra-low sulphur or "city" diesel 
expands and when the sulphur content of heating gasoil is also 
reduced to 0.05 per cent as planned by EU environmental 
legislation. At present there is no deadline for the changeover. 
Gasoil cargoes are traded on both a cif and fob basis. Average 
cargoes are the traditional 'handy' size for clean products of 
between 20,000 and 25,000 tonnes. Prices are typically negotiated 
at a differential to the IPE gas oil futures contract, which is most 
closely related to the ARA barge market. Barges trade out of the 
ARA range in 1000 to 5000 tonne lots, and move mainly into the 
Benelux countries and Germany. 
Gasoil prices are affected by a number of factors including 
variations in product quality standards set by the major European 
5.2ipage 8 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 261/964 ---
5 Product markets 
consuming countries, differences between the cold properties of 
winter and summer gasoil, and fluctuations in Russian and other 
import availabilities. As a result, there is continuous and active 
arbitrage between the cif cargo, fob cargo and barge markets. 
The European gasoil cargo market divides into north-west 
Europe and the Mediterranean. In north-west Europe, Germany is 
the major importer -either through Hamburg or Rotterdam -
and now absorbs most of the available Russian supplies. France 
occasionally imports Russian gasoil for quality reasons, particularly 
in winter, but meets most of its demand from local refineries. 
Scandinavian and UK refiners are net suppliers to the rest of 
Europe. The growth of the European diesel market has left the 
region with a 10 million tonne gasoil deficit which is supplied by 
imports from Russia and Algeria. There is now one EU-wide diesel 
grade -EN590 -but cold properties vary from country to 
country. For example, German EN590 has more stringent cold 
properties than French EN590 to cope with the colder weather. 
During the summer, trade on the north-west European cargo 
market is more or less restricted to diesel grades with the majority 
of spot trade for French quality based on 20,000 tonne cargoes 
delivered into the port of Le Havre. But during the winter, a wider 
variety of gasoils are traded classified according to their cold 
properties. German diesel has three grades -summer, winter and 
intermediate -each with different cold properties. French "fuel oil 
domestique" tFOD) can now only be used as a heating oil because of 
its higher sulphur content. 
Russian gasoil exports to Europe became erratic after the 
break-up of the Soviet Union and the deterioration of relations 
between Russia and Latvia, through which the bulk of Russia's 
gasoil exports to north-west Europe must pass. Russian gasoil 
specifications, such as sulphur content, cold point and pour point, 
are variable and quality suffers at times from bacterial 
contamination, although this is on1.y a problem during the summer 
months as winter temperatures are too low to support the bacteria. 
Deutsche Industrie Normal (DIN) grade gasoil, for heating, is 
only used in Germany. The specification varies from 4°C cloud 
point and -7°C cold filter plugging point during the summer to 0°C 
cloud point and -12°C cold filter plugging point in winter, but this 
will change to a single all-year-round specification (1 to 3°C cloud 
point and -10 to -12°C cold filter plugging point) from October 
1998. Unofficially, German refiners have been producing the new 
specification since the start of 1998. DIN gasoil is produced by 
German, Scandinavian and UK refiners and trades on the barge 
markets and in cargo lots. Trade is much heavier in winter when 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2fpage 9

--- Page 262/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
German refiners are unable to satisfy local demand. German winter 
diesel is used from the start of November to the end of February 
and summer diesel is used between the start of April and the end of 
September. Intermediate diesel is used in March and October. 
In the Mediterranean, the main sources of supply are Russia, 
Algeria and the Italian offshore refineries. The Mediterranean 
equivalent of FOD, Italian 0.2 per cent sulphur gasoil, is sold out of 
the Italian islands refineries on an fob basis, priced against 
European price quotations. Italian refiners also produce gasoil with 
a sulphur content ranging from 0.3 to 1 per cent for export to the 
Far East, eastern Mediterranean and west Africa if the arbitrage 
opens. This is usually sold in bulk lots of 40,000 to 70,000 tonnes 
and is traded at a discount to the 0.2 per cent sulphur grade. 
Algerian gasoil is of a low density with low cloud, pour and 
cold filter plugging points. As such, it provides a valuable blending 
stock. Algerian gasoil is often sold on a formula basis fob Skikda or, 
in smaller volumes, fob Arzew. It is also sold into north-west 
Europe on a cif basis at a premium over the IPE gasoil contract. 
Typical cargo sizes are 30,000 tonnes. 
5.2.5 Residual fuel oil 
Fuel oil is burnt in power stations and used as a fuel to power ships 
(bunkers). It is manufactured in two distinct forms: straight run 
and cracked. Straight run fuel oil is the product of primary 
(atmospheric) distillation and is typically sold (at a premium) as a 
feedstock to refiners who have unused vacuum distillation and 
cracking capacity and can therefore upgrade it into more valuable 
products such as gasoline and gas oil. Cracked fuel oil is produced 
from what is left after upgrading and is usually less valuable than 
straight run fuel oil (see Fig. 5.6). 
The straight run and cracked markets are separate and only 
converge when high refinery runs ensure that the straight run 
market is over-supplied, forcing poorer quality grades into the 
burning market. All refiners are potential sellers of straight run 
fuel oil, depending on their crude slate, distillation capacity and the 
size and sophistication of their upgrading units. The buyers for 
straight run fuel are refiners wanting to increase their gasoline and 
gas oil output, whereas the buyers for cracked fuel are power 
utilities, large industrial concerns and companies with bunkering 
outlets. If the price is sufficiently low, blenders will also buy 
straight-run fuel oil to add to the cracked fuel oil pool in order to 
reduce its viscosity, thus making it more valuable. 
The price of cracked fuel oil depends on its composition. The 
most important properties are sulphur and metals content, viscosity 
5.2/page 10 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 263/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Straight-run 05965 -- Cracked 1965 ULowsulphur premium -E4 premium 
OutngM Differential 
Cargoes CIF NW Europe 80 
70 
60 
9: 
0 
40 5 
30 
20 
10 
I 0 
Jan 92 Jan93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.6 Straight run and cracked fuel oil prices 
and specific gravity. Sulphur is restricted for environmental 
reasons and most utilities cannot burn high sulphur material 
unless they have installed flue-gas desulphurisation facilities. 
Metals such as vanadium can cause engine damage and their 
content is restricted in the bunker market. And sulphur, density 
water content and ash all affect the heat output of fuel oil and 
therefore its value in the burning market. Specific gravity is a key 
consideration in the bunker market since lower gravity material is 
easier to separate from water. The specific gravity of fuel oil can 
vary from 0.991 to over 1.000, but material with a specific gravity of 
1.000 (the same as water) is never used as bunker fuel. 
Low quality European material is often delivered into west 
Africa, particularly Senegal and Cote d’Ivoire. In addition to utility 
demand, bunker supplies for west African ports are also supplied by 
traders from the Mediterranean. Bunker sales go farther afield 
than west Africa. When the arbitrage to the Far East is open, 
material from the Mediterranean often moves to the bunkering 
centres of Fujairah and Singapore. 
High sulphur fuel oil cargoes 
Most of the spot buying interest for high sulphur cracked fuel oil in 
north-west Europe used to come from power utilities in the UK, 
Eire and Portugal, but this market has largely disappeared over the 
last few years as gas has taken a larger share of the electricity 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2tpage 11

--- Page 264/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
generation market. The Portuguese power utility CPPE (formerly 
EDP) still tenders for high sulphur fuel oil. But the UK utilities 
now only buy one cargo in six months. 
In the UK, the quality specifications varied from buyer to 
buyer. The largest utility, National Power was the most flexible 
because it has the facilities to blend fuel oil to any required density 
at its Littlebrook power station on the River Thames. National 
Power can take fuel oil up to 1.005 sg and can also take material 
with vanadium levels as high as 300 ppm and with a high viscosity 
level of 120 cst at 80°C. The now defunct forward paper market for 
high sulphur fuel oil (Littlebrook Lottery) was based on physical 
delivery into the Littlebrook terminal. 
Other UK utilities are not as flexible and require more precise 
sulphur and density specifications. Both Powergen and Scottish 
Hydro buy 3 per cent sulphur 0.998 sg material. The 
petrochemicals giant ICI is the other main end-user of cracked fuel 
oil in the UK. ICI has restrictions on metals content and buys 3.5 
per cent sulphur, 1.005 sg, 150 ppm vanadium material for use in 
its own power station. Portugal's national utility company, 
Electricidade de Portugal (EdP) was the most regular single buyer 
of cracked high sulphur fuel oil in Europe, purchasing 3.5 per cent 
sulphur, 0.998 sg material. In addition, Electricite de France (EdF) 
sometimes needs to enter the spot market when low rainfall or 
plant shutdowns restrict nuclear output. Utilities in Spain typically 
buy all their fuel oil from domestic refiners. 
The high sulphur fuel oil market in the Mediterranean covers 
a wider range of specifications than in NW Europe. Several 
countries, including Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, Cyprus, Malta and 
the Lebanon, have regular utility tenders. But Italy, which is the 
largest utility market, usually burns low sulphur fuel oil although 
Enel now buys some medium and high sulphur fuel oil since it can 
meet its sulphur emissions target through improved technology and 
increased use of gas. Enel will also take straight-run cargoes from 
the Black Sea and north Africa and, occasionally, Indonesian low 
sulpur waxy residue (LSWR). 
The bunker market in the Mediterranean is highly active, but 
unlike Rotterdam in NW Europe, there is no natural 
Mediterranean centre for bunkering operations. 
LOW sulphur fuel oil cargoes 
The Italian state utility, Enel, is the world's largest single buyer of 
fuel oil. In a typical year some 6 million tonnes will be bought on a 
tender basis from traders, 5 million tonnes from refiners and a 
further 5 million tonnes from oil producers. The tender basis 
5.2ipage 12 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 265/964 ---
I 
5 Product markets 
I "T Caraoes. CIF NWE 
45 1%S -3%S 
Jan90 Jan 91 Jan92 Jan93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.7 Lou! sulphur minus high sulphur fuel oil prices 
recently changed from a formula based on a mixture of fob north- 
west Europe and fob Mediterranean quotes to one based on cif 
Mediterranean quotes (see Fig. 5.7). Low sulphur fuel oil is also 
exported to utilities on the US Gulf and US east coast, but the US 
market tends to follow Europe since Enel is such a large consumer. 
Most of Europe's low sulphur fuel oil (LSFO) supply comes 
from north-west European and Scandinavian refiners, with most 
trade done on an fob basis. Although European cargoes are 
generally 25,000 tonnes, Scandinavian refiners tend to sell cargoes 
of up to 40,000 tonnes. 
Barges 
In north-west Europe there is also an active barge market 
operating in the Rotterdam-Antwerp area. The high sulphur barge 
market supplies bunkers, inland demand and is used to top-up 
export cargoes. The most commonly traded grade is 3.5 per cent 
sulphur, 380 cst viscosity and 0.991 density. Barge price quotations 
are usually used in the active high sulphur swaps market. Low 
sulphur barges supply the inland market in Germany and the 
Benelux countries. Additional quality specifications for low sulphur 
fuel oil include flash point and metals content. 
Flash point is the temperature (measured in "C) at which oil 
ignites and restrictions apply to the transport of oil through 
German towns. For safety reasons, lower flash material cannot go 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2tpage 13

--- Page 266/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
up the Rhine beyond the Ruhr. The most common flashpoints are 
65°C and 100°C -the latter commanding a price premium. 
Although most refiners do produce 100°C flash point material, few 
will guarantee it and flash point can be a problem for trading 
companies. 
LSFO metal restrictions are based on nickel content. The 
current restriction in Germany is 24 ppm, which compares with 30 
ppm required by the Italian utility Enel. 
Straight run fuel oil 
Straight run fuel oil (SRFO) is generally used as a refinery 
feedstock, but both high and low sulphur SRFO occasionally find 
their way onto the burning market. 
SRFO is divided broadly into high and low sulphur product, 
although the variety of specifications within these categories is as 
broad as the crude slate from which they are derived. SRFO will 
usually carry a premium over cracked fuel because it can be 
processed to produce more valuable products in addition to its 
cracked fuel yield. 
Russian E4 (named after the Engler measure of its viscosity) is 
one of the most commonly traded grades of SRFO in north-west 
Europe and acts as a price marker. In the Mediterranean, Russian 
MlOO and M40 (M standing for ‘mazut’ which is the Russian for 
fuel oil) is more commonly seen, although there are now 
considerable quantities of M40 and MlOO available in northwest 
Europe from Tallinn and St Petersburg. The volume of Russian 
trade is highly seasonal, and it has been usual in recent years for 
exports to be banned altogether by the Russian government during 
the winter months. 
The break-up of the former Soviet Union has affected the 
quality of fuel oil exports. This is most easily seen in the viscosity of 
the material. Previously all E4 product was blended into standard 
product at the Lithuanian port of Klaipeda, but specifications 
started to fluctuate because the refineries which produce E4 no 
longer export through a centralised system. At present, the 
viscosity of E4 ranges between 2.4 and 3.2 Engler, but 4 Engler is 
still taken as the price basis, with a standard premium or discount 
of $0.40 per tonne for every 0.1 Engler below or above 4 degrees. 
Other regular suppliers of high sulphur SRFO (also known as 
high sulphur straight run fuel or HSSR) into the Mediterranean 
market are Turkey, Portugal and Egypt. Iranian HSSR is normally 
sold into Canada or the Caribbean, but if supplies of better quality 
Russian HSSR are tight, traders might offer the material into the 
Mediterranean or NW European markets. Poor quality, high 
5.2ipage 14 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 267/964 ---
5 Product markets 
sulphur Syrian material regularly goes into the burning markets of 
the Mediterranean, or into the US for the spring bitumen season. 
Saudi Arabia produces various grades of HSSR, of which over 2 
million tonnes are exported each year. 
The main sellers of low sulphur SRFO (also known as low 
sulphur straight run fuel or LSSR) are refineries without 
upgrading units. The buyers are refiners who wish to run more 
feedstock through spare cracking capacity. Although North Sea 
straight run is the most actively traded in north-west Europe, 
Portuguese and North African material is also available. Leixos 
material from Portugal's Oporto refinery has a high metals content 
but gives a good vacuum gasoil (VGO) yield and usually goes into 
the US market. North African grades generally have a low sulphur 
content -LSSR from Algeria is practically VGO -and LSSR from 
Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia also finds its way onto the market. The 
high pour point and nickel content of Libyan LSSR reduces its 
value, as do destination restrictions resulting from Libya's 
exclusion from the US market. However, its low sulphur content 
makes it popular with refiners and traders in Europe. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.2tpage 15

--- Page 268/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 269/964 ---
5.3 United States 
The United States is the single largest user of oil products in the 
world, consuming 18.6 million b/d of refined products in 1997. Its 
demand barrel is also exceptionally light compared with most other 
countries. Distillate products -gasoline, heating oil, diesel and jet 
fuel -account for 70 per cent of US product demand and gasoline 
alone constitutes 43 per cent of the total (see Table 5.4). But, 
despite having the world's largest and most sophisticated refining 
system, the US remains dependent on imports of refined products 
from Venezuela: Canada, Algeria, Europe, the Caribbean and Asia. 
Imports averaged 1.9 million b/d in 1997 -10 per cent of total US 
products demand -and the key consuming markets in the north- 
east rely on imports to meet about 1'7 per cent of gasoline demand 
and 16 per cent of heating oil demand. Despite its dependence on 
imports, the US also exported 900,000 b/d of refined products in 
1997, mainly to Latin America where refiners can sell product that 
does not meet the much tighter domestic quality specifications. 
Table 5.4 United States product supply a.nd demand, 1997 
Product Consumption Refinery output Net imports 
million b/d million b/d million b/d 
Gas01 i n e 8.01 7.74 +0.17 
Distillate fuel oil 3.43 3.39 +O.U8 
Jet fuel 1.60 1.55 +O.OG 
Residual fuel oil 0.80 0.71 +0.08 
Othcr pmduclsr 4.78 3.36 +0.661 
Total 18.62 16.75 +1.04 
Source: EIA * inchides LPG 9iizcludes bleizding canzponenk 
Waterborne imports -especially for gasoline and gasoline 
blending components -play an important role in the overall US 
supply and demand balance. Although US refineries are among the 
most complex in the world and produce a very high yield of 
gasoline, capacity is now fully utilised for most of the year, leaving 
the country increasingly dependent on imports to meet rising 
gasoline demand. But the volume of spot product trade has declined 
in recent years as the structure of the market changed. There are 
now fewer companies operating downstream because of mergers. 
More oil moves in integrated channels as a result of joint ventures 
with foreign producers. And environmental regulations have 
created a fragmented market with many more grades of product. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3/page 1

--- Page 270/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The US refined products market is divided into two distinct 
markets separated by the physical barrier of the Rocky Mountains 
with very little movement of products between the two. 
Increasingly strict environmental regulations have also served to 
fragment the US market, with products meeting different 
specifications required in various parts of the country. 
Physical trade in oil products east of the Rockies is centred on 
Boston, Massachusetts and New York Harbor for the north-east of 
the country, on the Colonial pipeline which links Gulf coast refiners 
to consumers along the Atlantic coast as far north as New York, 
and on the Explorer and Williams pipelines that link the Gulf coast 
to Tulsa, Chicago and Minneapolis. There is also a relatively small 
Gulf coast cargo market which serves shipments to the state of 
Florida and for export. 
Within the west coast market, most trade occurs on the 
Southern California and Santa Fe Pacific pipelines. The two 
pipelines supply California, Nevada and the western part of 
Arizona from Los Angeles and San Francisco. The west coast is 
isolated from the rest of the US market by the high cost of 
transport and relative prices can differ by as much as 20 
cen tdgallon. 
Complex environmental rules -which have required massive 
investments in refinery upgrading and have led to rising product 
storage costs -together with slim trading margins have conspired 
to reduce the number of companies willing to participate in both the 
Atlantic coast and the west coast refined products markets. Indeed, 
the west coast market is now almost entirely dominated by five 
companies, Arco, Chevron, Exxon, Equilon -a new joint 
downstream venture between Texaco and Shell -and Tosco. 
5.3.1 Gasoline 
US gasoline demand is the highest in the world, averaging just over 
8 million b/d in 1997, and consumption has recently been growing 
at around 1.5 per cent a year spurred on by strong economic growth 
and a shift to less efficient vehicles. But, although domestic 
gasoline production capacity has expanded greatly over the last ten 
years as refiners have brought more upgrading capacity on stream, 
the US remains dependent on imports to meet demand -especially 
in the high consuming centres of the north-east. Imports briefly fell 
after the introduction of reformulated gasoline in 1995 but have 
since recovered, supported by the revival of the New York Harbor 
gasoline blending market, and are now higher than ever (see Fig. 
5.8). Foreign producers initially found it difficult to meet the new 
environmental standards, but restrictions on imports were 
5.3ipage 2 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 271/964 ---
5 Product markets 
successfully challenged as discriminatory in the World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) under the 1994 General Agreement on Trade 
and Tariffs (GATT) by Venezuela and Brazil, which now form 
important sources of supply. European refiners also export "off-
spec" gasoline to the US which is used for blending. Imports of 
gasoline blending components averaged 200,000 b/d in 1997 
compared with 309,000 b/d for finished gasoline. 
Gasoline quality specifications 
The 1990 amendments to the US Clean Air Act (CAA) ae the 
strictest environmental regulations in the world. They set limits on 
sulphur, carbon monoxide and ozone-forming emissions. The CAA 
rules have included a number of measures aimed at reducing 
harmful emissions from the combustion of gasoline and, as a result, 
have significantly altered the physical characteristics of gasoline 
sold in the US. The first measure was the lead-phasedown 
programme, initiated in the early 198Os, which has resulted in only 
unleaded gasoline now being permitted for sale in the US. 
The second phase of the CAA regulations placed limits on the 
volatility of gasoline throughout the year and was introduced to 
combat increased vapour emissions resulting from the extensive 
use of butane as a blending component. The third phase of the 
regulations, effective from the autumn of 1992, was aimed at 
reducing carbon monoxide emissions and required the use of 
output Imports 
8.5 1.4 
Refinery output 
Imports (inc components) 1.2 
1.0 
7.5 
aD 0.8 z 
c
 6 7.0 0 ._ ._ --.-0.6E 
6.5 
0.4 
6.0 0.2 
5.5 0.0 
Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan 
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 
3urce: Argus Fundamentals, EIA 
Figure 5.8 Gasoline: US refinery output a.nd imports 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3fpage 3

--- Page 272/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
gasoline with a 15 per cent oxygen content by volume for either 4or 
6 months between 1October and 1April in 41 major US cities. 
The introduction of reformulated gasoline (RFG) in 1995 was 
intended to reduce the build-up of ozone in the atmosphere. RFG 
must be supplied to nine major US urban areas with the most 
severe summertime ozone levels since 1January 1995. A number of 
other urban areas also opted to join the scheme -but some then 
decided to leave it, creating confusion for suppliers and temporarily 
limiting the trading horizons of the Nymex unleaded gasoline 
futures contract. By 1997 RFG accounted for 32 per cent of the total 
US gasoline market, and 39 per cent of the highly urbanised PAD 
District I market. 
RFG is being introduced in a number of stages. Phase I, which 
runs from 1995 to 1999, involves two steps. The first step, which 
began in January 1995, required US refiners to produce RFG with 
a lower content of ozone-forming and other specified toxic air 
pollutants than the actual supplies that they produced in 1990. 
Each refiner established its own "baseline" gasoline quality and 
used a "simple model" to certify its RFG output based on the 
reduction in oxygen, benzene and aromatics content and RVP. But 
the second step, which began in January 1998, requires US refiners 
to achieve additional reductions in olefins, sulphur and the 
percentage of fuel evaporated at 200 and 300". This is known as 
the "complex model" and imposes a new statutory (average) 
baseline for sulphur and olefins which all refiners must meet. 
Further reductions in the level of toxic air pollutants (TAP), volatile 
organic compounds (VOC) and nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions will 
be required under Phase I1 of the RFG program which starts on 1 
January 2000. 
Foreign refiners were initially required to meet the statutory 
(average) baseline -which made it much more difficult for them to 
export RFG to the US. But this ruling was found to be 
discriminatory under GATT by the WTO in 1996 and foreign 
refiners are now allowed to establish their own individual 1990 
baselines in the same way as domestic refiners. If foreign refiners 
do not establish their own baseline, exports to the US are regulated 
through the company importing the RFG and are subject to the 
importer's own baseline. Coventional gasoline imports are also 
monitored as part of the wider "anti-dumping" rule -which is 
intended to ensure that average per gallon emissions of specified 
pollutants are not worse than 1990 levels -and more stringent 
standards could be set in the future if the average quality of 
conventional gasoline imports deteriorates. 
5.3ipage 4 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 273/964 ---
5 Product markets 
The US north-east ga.soLine market 
The majority of gasoline imports into the US arrive in the key 
consuming centres of the north-east, which rely on imports to meet 
up to one fifth of their gasoline demand. The two main gasoline 
import cargo markets are based on New York Harbor and Boston, 
Massachusetts, but imports are also taken into other ports in the 
region, such as New Haven and Portsmouth. Imports are typically 
drawn in from Canadian, European, Caribbean and Venezuelan 
refiners. Many European refiners now produce gasoline which 
meets US RFG specifications, but an active blending market has 
emerged in New York involving companies such as Itochu, George 
E. Warren and BP. Gasoline blendstocks come from Brazil, Algeria, 
Romania, Argentina and other countries. The finished gasoline is 
then sold into the New York Harbor barge market or into the mid- 
continent via the Buckeye pipeline. 
Boston used to be an active cargo market, since it depends 
solely on waterborne imports to meet demand, but few cargoes are 
now traded on a cif basis. Most finished gasoline is bought by US 
distributors on an fob basis in Europe and cif sales are limited 
mainly to 50-150,000 barrel part-cargoes. But blendstocks are sold 
on a cif basis into New York. New England has no refining capacity 
and the 2 million b/d Colonial pipeline terminates at New York 
Harbor. Boston requires smaller vessels due to port restrictions: 
maximum cargo sizes are 225,000 barrels. While New York Harbor 
can accept cargoes of up to 500,000 barrels, only the majors and the 
largest international traders can take physical delivery of cargoes 
of this size. 
Since Boston marketers are net short of gasoline, many sign 
long-term supply contracts with exporting nations. In the past 
these firms also traded on the spot market to balance their 
positions, supporting the development of an active forward market 
-‘Boston Bingo’ -which allows for the sale or purchase of cargoes 
up to two months forward. Boston Bingo contracts are for 225,000 
barrel cargoes. But the Boston Bingo market has almost 
disappeared now that most importers buy product on an fob basis in 
Europe, and forward trade is limited to only afew players. 
Most trade in the New York Harbor market is for regular 
unleaded gasoline -reflecting its dominance of the retail market 
where it commands a 65 per cent share. Regulax unleaded gasoline 
serves as the pricing benchmark for premium (which accounts for 
20 per cent of the retail market) and for midgrade (which accounts 
for the remaining 10 per cent). New York is at the centre of the 
north-east consuming region and is supplied either by sea, via the 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3fpage 5

--- Page 274/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Colonial pipeline or from local refiners. It is also the first input 
point for the Buckeye Pipeline serving the US Midwest. 
Most of the trade is for 25,000 barrel barge lots. Barges are 
typically sold on a free on board (fob) basis from anywhere in New 
York Harbor. But trading volumes have fallen sharply in recent 
years and the barge market has become increasingly prompt. Trade 
has also developed for 'off-line' supplies, which are 25,000 barrel 
lots delivered to terminals at the end of the Colonial pipeline in 
Linden, New Jersey. This trade is closely linked to the arbitrage 
between Gulf coast and New York Harbor markets. Trades are also 
done "delivered Buckeye" available at Buckeye breakout storage. 
Although barge volumes are suitable for meeting incremental 
supply, most demand is met with waterborne cargo imports. About 
two gasoline cargoes a day (around 425,000 b/d) are delivered to the 
New York Harbor market during the peak driving season between 
June and August, compared with only 5-7 barge lots (125-280,000 
b/d). 
The prices for clean product cargoes in Boston and New York 
are rarely the same. The alternative to imports is New York barges 
plus freight of 1-1.25 centdgallon. Cargoes in New York usually 
carry a premium to barges as traders are often willing to pay more 
to obtain the volume they require in a single transaction instead of 
8-10 barge transactions. 
Nymex RFG 
4 
2 
0 I 
c 
-;-2 
m \ 
E -48 
4 - NY Harbor Cargoes 
-8 
-1 0 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Nymex 
Figure 5.9 Unleaded gasoline: spot minus Nymex futures prices 
5.3ipage 6 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 275/964 ---
5 Product markets 
The Gulf coa.st ga.soline market 
The majority of Gulf coast gasoline trade occurs on the 1.9 million 
b/d Colonial pipeline: which takes in products from refineries in 
Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi and serves the Atlantic coast 
markets with the exception of Florida. The Colonial pipeline 
specifications typically set the standard for the Nymex clean 
products futures contracts: the Boston Bingo market and other 
physical trade along the US Gulf and Atlantic coasts. 
The Colonial pipeline has active product codes for 38 different 
grades of gasoline (including RFG) and multiple vapour pressures 
for each grade: seven grades of kerosene, 16 grades of heating oil 
and diesel and one grade of transmix (the interface between 
gasoline and distillate batches). About half the codes are for 
"fungible" products that meet published Colonial specifications and 
the rest are for segregated branded products or blendstocks. In the 
case of fungible products, shippers may not receive the actual 
product delivered to the pipeline but receive the equivalent quality 
material. Gasoline grades are given different letters (see below) to 
distinguish between conventional, reformulated, octane number 
and oxygen content. Attached to these letters are numbers, which 
indicate the RVP and oxygen content at various times of the year. 
For example, regular grade gasoline used in the New York area in 
winter is coded A5. 
Letter coders: A C D M P R S U V 
Octane 87 92 93 87 92 93 87 92 93 
111�C J J J 
Conventional J J J J J J 
Non -oxygen atrd J J J 
Oxygen ate a1 1owed J J J 
Numeric codes: reformulated gasoline 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
RVP (psi) 7.4 8.3 11.5 13.5 15.0 8.3 11.5 13.5 15.0 
Oxygen 1.5-2.79 wt J J J J J 
Oxygen 2.7-2.99 wt J J J J 
Numeric codes: conventional gasoline 
0 1 2 3 4 5 
RVP (psi) 7.0 7.8 9.0 11.5 13.5 15.0 
The Colonial pipeline market centres around the first input 
point to the pipeline at Pasadena in Texas. The basis for most 
trades is free in pipe (fip) Pasadena, Texas. Regular and premium 
unleaded gasoline (both conventional and reformulated) account for 
about 55 per cent of the total refined products shipped on the 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3/page 7

--- Page 276/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
pipeline. The size of lots traded are typically 25,000 barrels (the 
minimum size of a fungible product batch) and the volume of 
gasoline shipments on the pipeline is around 1million b/d. 
Like the Atlantic coast cargo and barge markets, all product 
trading on the Colonial pipeline is done relative to the New York 
based Nymex gasoline contracts, but using the following month 
Nymex contract because it requires, on average, 19 days to move 
products from one end of the line to the other. While regular 
unleaded gasoline deals are done at futures-related prices, 
premium unleaded gasoline is typically discussed relative to 
regular unleaded conventional gasoline prices. The most actively 
traded Colonial gasoline grade is conventional southern grade (MI, 
with southern RVP. Premium conventional (V) and regular RFG 
(A) are also traded, at a differential to M grade. 
The Colonial forward market has traded as much as eight 
months ahead, but is normally confined to one month forward with 
the prompt half cycle (5 days) receiving most attention. Trade has 
frequently been disrupted in recent years by pro-rationing and 
independently scheduled pumping cycles. 
Florida is completely dependent on waterborne supplies and 
Gulf coast cargo and barge shipments have grown steadily over the 
last decade. However, little spot trade occurs as most companies 
transfer supplies from their Gulf coast refineries to retail networks 
in Florida. Traders meet seasonal demand surges through cargoes 
from Europe and South America and Florida is attractive to foreign 
refiners as the state does not require the use of reformulated gasoline. 
Ports such as Wilmington, North Carolina and Savannah, Georgia 
have also become regular importers of gasoline. Florida trade is 
often tied up on contract with Venezuelan or Gulf coast refiners. 
5.3.2 Distillate fuel oil 
Demand for middle distillates in the US is less than half the 
demand for gasoline, averaging just over 3.4 million b/d in 1997, 
but it is growing nearly twice as fast, especially in the transport 
sector where diesel demand is being driven by strong economic 
growth. About one third of the distillate market is heating oil (used 
to heat homes and businesses, primarily in the north-east) and two- 
thirds low sulphur diesel fuel (used mainly in the truck transport 
sector and predominantly in the industrial heartland of the mid- 
continent and on the Atlantic coast). Heating oil demand is highly 
seasonal, while diesel demand is relatively steady, with a slight dip 
in the winter months (January and February). 
The structure of the US distillate market changed with the 
introduction of a new low sulphur specification for diesel fuel as a 
5.3ipage 8 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 277/964 ---
5 Product markets 
result of the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. Previously 
there was no practical distinction between heating oil and diesel as 
far as many refiners were concerned since they produced mid-
sulphur distillates with a high cetane level that could be used in 
both markets. But the maximum sulphur content of diesel fuel was 
reduced from 0.2 to 0.05 per cent from 1October 1993 and the two 
markets are now segregated. The premium for low sulphur diesel 
over heating oil is highly seasonal and varies between 2-3 
centdgallon in early summer and less than one cent/gallon in 
winter (see Fig. 5.10). Heating oil is dyed red to distinguish it from 
road diesel. Diesel is also dyed in the north-east states of the US to 
stop highway tax evasion by dist.ributors. 
The US north-ea.st distillate market 
The main consuming centres of the US north-east remain 
dependent on imports to meet seasonal demand surges for heating 
oil. Imports meet an average of 15 per cent of distillate demand in 
PADD I: but this proportion can rise during the peak winter 
consuming months. Pre-positioning of inventory is a major issue in 
the heating oil markets. In the winter of 1996-97, when heating oil 
markets were in backwardation and stocks were low, the Colonial 
pipeline was unable to move enough oil at short notice from the US 
Gulf coast to meet demand and companies had to charter ships 
instead. But in the winter of 1997-98, the contango encouraged 
NY Harbor Barges35 
30 
25 - -
m p 20 I C
’15 10 
05 
00 
Sep Mar Sep Ma Sep Mar Sep Mar Sep Mar Sep 
93 94 94 95 95 96 96 97 97 98 98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.10 Distillate fuel oil: low sulphur diesel premium 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3fpage 9

--- Page 278/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
stockbuilding in the north-east and supplies were adequate. 
The majority of heating oil cargo imports arrive in Boston, 
Massachusetts. Cold winters and isolation from the rest of the US 
supply and distribution system make Boston one of the most 
important heating oil cargo markets, but spot trade has fallen 
sharply in recent years as term contracts with refiners in Canada 
and Venezuela have become more prevalent. It is less important as 
a market for diesel fuel since it is not a centre for truck transport. 
Low sulphur diesel barge trade is much more active in New York 
Harbor due to local transport needs and access to the Buckeye 
Pipeline, which is used to supply product to Pennsylvania and 
Ohio. Cargo trade in both low sulphur diesel and heating oil in New 
York Harbor is rare, being restricted to periods of extremely cold 
weather. Blending of distillates occurs only during the winter to 
improve cold weather performance. 
Heating oil and low sulphur diesel are traded predominantly in 
25,000 barrel barge lots in New York Harbor. Like the gasoline 
barge market, most trade is restricted to prompt deals, or delivery 
within three days, although deals are occasionally transacted from 
10 to 30 days forward. 
The Gulf coast distillate cargo market 
Rising distillate demand in Latin America has made the Gulf coast 
an increasingly active cargo export market; it now accounts for 
~ NY Harbor Cargoes 
. . .. . . . Colonial Pipeline 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan96 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Nymex 
Figure 5.11 Distillate fuel oil: spot minus Nymex futures prices 
5.3ipage 10 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 279/964 ---
5 Product markets 
about two thirds of US distillate exports. Exports are particularly 
attractive to US refiners who require secure outlets for distillates 
which do not meet tighter US sulphur limits. Most distillate exports 
go to countries such as Brazil, Ecuador; Peru and Argentina. Brazil 
has become a major importer, but switches its purchases between 
the Gulf coast, Mediterranean and Far East depending on price. 
Gulf coast distillate cargoes are normally priced on a 
publication-related basis: but are also done against Nymex heating 
oil futures prices. 
Cargo market trade is steady, but the greatest volume of 
distillate trade on the Gulf coast is on the Colonial pipeline which 
transports about 500,000 b/d of heating oil and low sulphur diesel. 
Most of this now trades on the Colonial spot market as the volume 
of forward or ‘paper’ trade has declined in recent years. 
5.3.3 Jet fuel 
Total US jet fuel demand was 1.6million bid in 1997, most of which 
is met from domestic refinery output. Imports, which averaged just 
under 100,000 b/d, are mostly delivered to Florida, New York and 
Boston from refineries in Venezuela and the Virgin Islands. Jet fuel 
is rarely traded on the spot market. Almost all jet fuel is sold by 
refiners to airlines on a contract basis. Airlines enter the market 
only during transport-led demand surges and rarely sell excess 
supplies. But jet fuel, which has superior cold weather properties, is 
30 
NY Harbor 6arges
25 
20 
15 
m 1 
(0+ 
10 
5 
0 
5 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan83 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
3urce: Petroleum Argus, Nymex 
Figure 5.12 Jet fuel: spot minus Nymex No. 2 futures prices 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3ipage 11

--- Page 280/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
also an excellent blending stock for heating oil and low sulphur 
diesel supplies. As a result, harsh winter weather can lead to a 
surge in jet fuel trading in the US north-east. Jet fuel is also bought 
by power utilities for the gas-turbine units that meet peak demand, 
especially when electricity prices surge as hot or cold weather 
arrives. What little trade does occur in the markets of the US 
north-east is either in 25,000 barrels barge lots, or in volumes of 
10,000 barrels or less. Barges are normally priced relative to the 
near month heating oil futures contract. 
Most jet fuel trade on the Gulf coast takes place on the 
Colonial pipeline. Jet fuel pipeline movements averaged around 
300,000 b/d in 1997. Most jet fuel is kept in the internal systems of 
refiners to meet commitments to airlines. Jet fuel prices on the 
Colonial pipeline are driven by demand from the airline hubs in the 
states of the US southeast. There is a small Gulf coast jet fuel 
export market, but its importance has declined as exports of the 
product have fallen. 
Two grades of jet fuel are traded within the US: 55 grade and 
54 grade. 55 grade has a higher flash point and a lower sulphur 
content and is often used to reduce sulphur in blending. There are 
important differences between the specifications of jet fuel used for 
internal US flights and those required for international flights. Jet 
fuel exported to the Far East, Europe or South America must meet 
the international DERD 2494 standard which specifies higher flash 
and lower freezing points than US 54 grade jet fuel (see section 
5.2.3). 
5.3.4 Residual fuel oil 
Residual fuel oil demand in the US stabilised at around 800,000 b/d 
in 1996-97 after a long period ofdecline during which more natural 
gas was used in power generation. Fuel oil remains a flexible 
means of generating electricity without the need for long-term 
supply contracts and this has put a floor under demand. Fuel oil 
use increased in early 1998 as prices fell to very low levels making 
it more competitive against natural gas (see Fig. 5.14). 
The main US fuel oil consumers in 1997 were utilities (38 per 
cent), ship bunkering (41 per cent) and industrial/commercial users 
(21 per cent). Most of the utilities which burn fuel oil to generate 
electricity are located along the Atlantic coast and are easily served 
by waterborne cargoes or domestic barges. But fuel oil use in power 
generation has fallen sharply over the past ten years because of 
competition from natural gas, which has a lower sulphur content 
and is often cheaper, especially in states -such as New York and 
New Jersey -that have imposed additional taxes on fuel oil. 
5.3ipage 12 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 281/964 ---
I 
5 Product markets 
PAD District I 
< 0 31% sulphur 
40.479 b:d 
>1% sulphur 
104,107 b 0.31-1% sulphur 
31,721 h;d 
Source: EIA 
Figure 5.13 Residual fuel oil: PAD District I imports, 1997 
Environmental rules have also played an important role in limiting 
residual fuel oil use in power generation. Atlantic coast utilities 
burn a variety of grades of fuel oil -ranging from 0.3 per cent to 
2.2 per cent sulphur. In the past, state environmental regulations 
typically forced utilities to burn lower sulphur fuel oils, but utilities 
now have more flexibility as pollution controls are based on 
emissions rather than fuel type. If a utility burns more gas it gets 
"emission credits" which can be offset against a higher sulphur fuel 
oil. Thus a utility like Florida Power and Light can choose to burn 
either 1. or 2 per cent sulphur fuel depending on the price of gas. 
Utilities do not have direct purchase contracts with producing 
countries for fuel oil supplies. As a result, a trading community 
exists that buys fuel oil from producing countries in Latin America 
and west Africa, or from traders and refiners in Europe, Canada, 
the Caribbean or elsewhere and markets it to US utilities. Traders 
purchase most of their fuel oil under. term contracts and supply it to 
refiners under. annual or bi-annual contxacts. Traders may be 
forced onto the spot market in order to satisfy their conti*actual 
obligations in periods of heightened demand. Burning crudes from 
the North Sea (Alba, Gryphon) and the Far East (Duri) are also 
used in the Atlantic coast market during periods of high demand. 
Much of the utilities' term purchases, as well as the exporting 
countries' term sales, are priced relative to assessments made 
either by Argus or Platt’s at the time of loading or delivery -plus 
or minus a differential based on quality, fiseight or market 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3ipage 13

--- Page 282/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
35 - .. . . . . . 0.3% sulphur fuel oil 
____ 1.0% sulphur fuel oil 
30 - ;>: -2.2% sulphur fuel oil .. I , .,. .. Nyrnex natural gas 
I 5-
0 
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
I 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Nymex 
Figure 5.14 Residual fuel: NY Harbor cargo & natural gas prices 
conditions. In order to avoid the risk of manipulation, many 
utilities and national oil companies have recently moved to basket 
pricing and include both Argus and Platt�s in their sales and 
purchase contract formulas. Spot trade also takes place on either 
Argu.s or Platt�s quotations, or a combination of both, especially 
when prices are changing rapidly and fixed levels are difficult to 
determine. Since residual fuel oil prices are also used in formulas to 
determine contract prices for heavy crudes from Venezuela, Mexico 
and Canada, the market is subject to a wide range of influences and 
can be highly volatile. 
As utilities require fuel oil with specific maximum sulphur 
levels -typically 0.3 per. cent, 1per’ cent, 2 per’ cent or 2.2 per cent 
~ any oil with a sulphur- content that falls between these levels 
lends itself to blending since there is no tolerance for higher 
sulphur.. Utilities can reject a cargo that does not meet its 
specifications for. sulphui. content -or other product qualities such 
as viscosity, gravity, pour point, asphaltene and vanadium content -so accurate blending is essential. Increased liabilities for ship 
owner’s in the event of an oil spill have limited the availability of 
dirty tankers and barges. As a result, freight rates and the vetting 
of ships has become a major. issue in the fuel oil market. 
Refiners and mar*keter.s are the most active participants in 
blending; end users rarely blend fuel oil themselves. The Gulf coast 
is the largest fuel oil storage region in the western hemisphere, but 
more fuel oil blending now takes place in the Caribbean than the 
5.3/page 14 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 283/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Gulf coast or New York Harbor. US fuel oil markets are closely 
linked to Europe and the Mediterranean and the buying patterns of 
Enel, Italy's state power utility, can have a significant impact on 
US price levels. 
The US Gulf coast bunker market -from Houston to Florida -used to be the most active in the world, but has now been 
overtaken by Singapore (see section 5.4.6). Bunkers are sold in lots 
ranging from 500 tonnes to 1,500 tonnes, although 1,000 tonnes is 
more typical. Supplies are sourced from US Gulf coast refineries 
and from Mexico and Venezuela. Bunker prices on the Gulf coast 
are based on local fundamental supply and demand balances, but 
prices in other major global bunkering ports can affect Gulf coast 
prices. 
5.3.5 Vacuum gasoil 
Vacuum gasoil (VGO) is used mainly as a feedstock for catalytic 
crackers, although some refiners can also run high quality grades 
of straight run fuel oil with a high VGO yield. US refiners have the 
capacity to crack 5.4 million b/d of the product. The primary spot 
market for VGO is based on the Gulf coast refineries. There is also 
some spot activity into east coast refineries in Pennsylvania and 
New Jersey, but this market now trades relative to the US Gulf 
coast. 
Supply comes from both domestic and foreign refineries, the 
latter mainly in Europe and the Caribbean (Aruba and Venezuela). 
The market tends to fluctuate depending on changes in refinery 
balances in Europe, the US, Venezuela and Aruba (Coastal). 
Supplies of foreign material flow regularly from Venezuela, Spain 
and Aruba. Venezuelan contract holders in 1998 were Exxon, 
TOSCO, Conoco and Citgo. Traders participate in the market, but a 
number left the business in 1997. Blenders often supply prompt 
VGO to Gulf coast refiners on the Mississippi river and in Houston. 
The start-up of a vacuum distillation unit at TransAmerican 
Refining's Norco plant in Louisiana in 1994 created a division 
between the domestic and imported VGO markets. Cargo imports 
will now typically trade into the Gulf coast between Houston and 
Corpus Christi, Texas, but the Gulf coast east of Houston seeks 
domestic supply at a lower price. 
VGO cargoes are traded on a delivered Gulf coast basis. Prices 
are expressed as a differential to a formula based on a mixture of 
Platt’s spot waterborne price assessments in the ratio 70:30 
unleaded gasoline to heating oil. The import duty on VGO is 
equivalent to 0.30-0.35 centdgallon. Domestic material (including 
supplies from Canada) always trades at prices including duty, while 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3tpage 15

--- Page 284/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Jan90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
low sulphur 
. . . . .. . High sulphur 
medium sulphur 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.15 Vacuum gasoil: US Gulf coast cargo differentials 
imported material trades at prices excluding duty since duties only 
become the responsibility of the final purchaser once material 
arrives in the US. 
VGO prices are very sensitive to product specifications -the 
higher the sulphur, the larger the discount (see Fig. 5.15). Most 
requirements on the Gulf coast are contracted for 0.5 per cent 
maximum sulphur VGO. High sulphur VGO is typically up to 2 per 
cent, but some interest has been seen for material with a sulphur 
content higher than 2 per cent as Gulf coast refiners invest in more 
desulphurisation capacity. Medium sulphur VGO typically has a 
sulphur content in the range 0.8 to 1.2 per cent. Other key product 
specifications that affect prices are aniline point, Conradsen carbon 
residue, nickel and vanadium content. 
5.3.6 Other products 
Naphtha 
The most actively traded naphtha in the US is catalytic reformer 
grade which is used to produce regular and premium gasoline. 
Reforming naphtha -also known as heavy naphtha -typically 
contains a mixture of 40 to 50 per cent naphthenes and aromatics 
(N+A) with a minimum initial boiling point (IBP) of l5O2F and 
usually trades at a premium to full range or petrochemical 
naphtha. But the introduction of RFG reduced the aromatics 
content of gasoline and this -together with a decline in demand 
5.3ipage 16 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 285/964 ---
5 Product markets 
for premium grades -eroded the demand for reforming naphtha. 
Total naphtha imports averaged 51,000 Md in 1997 with Venezuela, 
Mexico, Puerto Rico and Algeria being the most important sources 
of supply. 
Anywhere from 50,000 b/d to 80,000 b/d is traded daily on the 
US Gulf coast. But cargo holders often find that material must be 
parcelled off into the domestic barge market -which is the main 
determinant of market levels in the US -and naphtha typically 
trades in increments of 50:OOO barrels. Trade occurs on both a 
delivered US Gulf coast and a delivered US Atlantic coast basis, 
and is priced at a differential to Platt�s regular unleaded gasoline 
waterborne assessment fob US Gulf coast. 
Methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) 
Methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) became an increasingly 
important component in gasoline production from 1994 onwards 
with the introduction of reformulated gasoline (RFG). Regulations 
now require a minimum MTBE content of 15 per cent by volume in 
finished RFG to meet specifications on aromatic content. MTBE is 
both an octane enhancer and an oxygenate that helps to prevent 
carbon monoxide from being formed on combustion. Refiner 
demand for MTBE is approximately 250,000 b/d, of which about 
200,000 b/d is met from local supplies. The rest is imported, 
principally from Canada, northwest Europe and Saudi Arabia. 
I l2O1 
100 
80 
-c0 -0 
p 60 + r 
m 
40 
I -MTBE, barges 
.. . . ... Unleaded conmntional 87 - Unleaded RFG 87 
2o 
04 
Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 535 Jan 97 Jan 98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.16 US Gulf coast MTBE &z unleaded gasoline prices 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3ipage 17

--- Page 286/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
MTBE is traded on a spot basis on both the Gulf coast and New 
York Harbor markets. Gulf coast MTBE is traded on a fixed-price 
basis in cents per US gallon. It is most often done in barge lots of 
25,000 barrels or smaller and is generally priced on an fob basis. 
5.3.7 West coast markets 
The US west coast market is unique in its virtual isolation from the 
international products markets. It has become dominated by five 
companies -Arco, Chevron, Exxon, Equilon and Tosco -since 
independent refiners have largely been forced out of the region 
through their inability to pay for the massive refinery upgrades 
required to meet the environmental mandates imposed by the 
Clean Air Act and the California Air Resources Board (CARB). 
CARB is a state agency that proposes and implements 
environmental legislation in California, which now has the strictest 
gasoline regulations in the US. Los Angeles and San Diego were 
obliged to join the RFG programme from 1January 1995 and local 
specifications on vapour pressure, sulphur, aromatics, benzene and 
olefins content were tightened in 1996 creating a CARB gasoline 
specification for the whole of California. In addition, CARB diesel 
specifications are tougher than those in the rest of the US as they 
also require a lower aromatic content to reduce the risk of ozone 
pollution. 
Total west coast refining capacity is nearly 3 million b/d (1.9 
million b/d in California) and the refineries are among the most 
sophisticated in the world, often with upgrading facilities to 
accommodate the predominantly heavy sour crude slate available in 
the region. West coast refined product prices are discussed in 
absolute terms -rather than at a differential to futures contract 
prices as is common in the Gulf coast and north-east markets -
since the Nymex futures prices are not a good price reference for 
the isolated west coast market. As a result, swaps rather than 
futures are used to hedge forward price risks. High freight costs 
and careful stock management by west coast refiners typically limit 
the arbitrage opportunities from the US Gulf coast, but imports 
from Asia-Pacific have increased in 1998 following the collapse in 
regional demand. 
Gasoline and blending components 
Increased gasoline production capacity at west coast refineries, 
stringent specifications for petroleum products and stagnant 
gasoline demand have all resulted in the west coast becoming 
almost self-sufficient in gasoline supply for its 1.4 million b/d 
5.3ipage 18 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 287/964 ---
5 Product markets 
I 1007 
-Unleaded 
No. 2 
CARB diesel 
. . . . . ..Jet 
40 ~ 
Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.17 US west coast: Los Angeles pipeline prices 
market. As a result, imported gasoline cargoes have become 
increasingly rare and only a few refiners (Valero and Hess) produce 
CARB grade gasoline; shipments out of the west coast do occur 
though with refiners exporting conventional (non-CAFiB) gasoline. 
In particular, gasoline is sold into the Gulf coast market when west 
coast stocks grow above normal levels in order to bolster local 
prices. West coast refiners also export reformate to the Far East 
since the aromatics content of gasoline has been strictly limited 
under environmental legislation, although the growth in Asia-
Pacific refinery capacity has reduced the opportunity to do this. 
Within the west coast market, most gasoline trade occurs on 
the Southern California and Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline (SFPPj.The 
340,000 b/d Southern California pipeline (formerly the Santa Fe 
West Pipeline) originates in Los Angeles and supplies San Diego, 
Phoenix, Tucson and Las Vegas through the Calnev system. The 
129,000 b/d Santa Fe North Pipeline originates in San Francisco 
and supplies Fresno, Stockton, Sacramento and Reno, Nevada. The 
Southern California pipeline is to expand its capacity to 520,000 b/d 
in 1999 in order to overcome bottlenecks in its gasoline and 
distill ate shipments. 
Trade in the Los Angeles area is on a free-in-pipe (fipj Watson 
(Los Angeles area) basis, typically in lots of 25,000 barrels. Trade in 
the San Francisco area is fip Concord for lots of between 5,000 
barrels and 20,000 barrels. There are four loading cycles a month 
and trade typically focuses on the next prompt cycle. Spot market 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.3ipage 19

--- Page 288/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
trading activity has fallen sharply in recent years as refiners have 
become more integrated, relying on the market only for marginal 
supplies. 
Distillate fuel oil 
Total distillate demand on the US west coast averaged 422,000 bld 
in 1997, almost all of it in farming, truck and rail transport. A 
small amount of diesel fuel is used in the Pacific north-west for 
space heating. 
Tight sulphur limits have all but stopped cargo imports into 
the west coast and local distillate supplies not meeting the 0.05 per 
cent sulphur limit are normally exported to the Far East and South 
America. Exports averaged 47,000 bld in 1997. Export cargoes are 
typically sold on a free on board (fob) basis with reference to a 
published price report, with a normal pricing window of three to 
five days. 
Jet fuel 
The west coast consumed some 437,000 bld of jet fuel in 1997, most 
of which comes from local refineries. As elsewhere, most jet fuel is 
sold to airlines on a contract basis, the Los Angeles and San 
Francisco markets only being used to manage short-term supply 
imbalances. 
Most of the region's imports (which average about 5,000 bld) 
are also purchased on a contract basis. The major suppliers are 
Korea, the Virgin Islands and Venezuela, with some additional 
volume coming from Japan and the Netherlands Antilles. Nearly a11 
jet cargo imports are priced relative to published price assessments. 
Residual fuel oil 
The extensive upgrading of west coast refineries has severely 
reduced the volume of residual fuel oil produced in the region, but 
exports still averaged 46,000 bld in 1997. Low sulphur waxy 
residue (LSWR) is sometimes imported by power utilities from 
Malaysia and Indonesia if the price is right. Imports of residual fuel 
oil averaged 5,000 bld in 1997. 
The west coast bunker market was greatly reduced by a 
bunker tax imposed in 1991 and not withdrawn before demand had 
been slashed. Vessels in the Pacific rely more frequently on the 
abundant -and often cheaper -supplies in Singapore, although 
bunker fuel is also sourced either from Tesoro's Alaskan refinery, or 
imports from Venezuela, Peru and Ecuador. 
5.3ipage 20 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 289/964 ---
5.4 Asia Pacific 
The Asia Pacific region was the worlds fastest growing market for 
oil products until the economic crisis brought demand growth to an 
unexpected standstill in 1998. A combination of rapid 
industrialisation, rising standards of living, growing populations 
and economic liberalisation had provided a strong stimulus for oil 
demand growth in the area. Asia Pacific oil demand grew at an 
average rate of 5 per cent from 1993 to 1997, compared with an 
increase of only 1.6 per cent for the world as a whole. 
Table 5.5Asia Pacific product supply and demand, 1997 
Area Consumption Refinery runs Net imports 
million b/d million bid million b/d 
Australasia 0.95 0.87 4.07 
China 4.01 3.09 +0.41 
Japan 5.79 4.33 +0.93 
Other Asia a.78 8.12 +1.11 
Asia Pacific 19.53 16.41 +2.38 
Source: BP Statistical ReuLew of World Energy 
In 1997, over 85 per cent of the Asia Pacific’s 19.5 million bid 
total oil consumption was supplied by refineries in the area, but the 
sudden downturn in demand in 1998 has created a temaorarT 
20 
W China Other 
18 16 14 
v 123 
5 10 ._--.-
E 8 
6 4 
2 II + t 0 
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 
3urce: BP Statistical Review of World Energy 
Figure 5.18 Asia Pacific oil demand growth, 1990-97 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 1

--- Page 290/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
product surplus, reversing the normal pattern of trade flows 
between east and west. The Asia Pacific region has traditionally 
been a net importer of refined products across the barrel, most of 
which come from the Middle East, the US west coast and -when 
market conditions are right -from as far afield as the 
Mediterranean and northwest Europe. But the demand collapse 
forced Asian refiners to find new export markets in 1998. 
Asia Pacific refining capacity expanded rapidly in the 1990s 
but failed to keep pace with even stronger demand growth. Nearly 
5 million b/d of new crude distillation plant has been commissioned 
since 1990 compared with an increase of nearly 6 million b/d in Asia 
Pacific oil demand. Refineries are also relatively unsophisticated 
compared with Europe and the United States. Less than a third of 
the region's 18 million b/d of crude distillation capacity has 
associated catalytic or hydro-cracking plant to increase the output 
of lighter products. As a result, the region produces a much higher 
yield of residual fuel oil than is common in western markets, but its 
output is not sufficient to meet local demand, which accounts for 20 
per cent of total Asia Pacific oil consumption by volume (see Table 
5.6). However, most new refineries are being built with upgrading 
capacity and this is gradually changing the balance of product 
trade in the region, which has now become a net exporter of 
gasoline. 
Table -5.6Asia Pacific oil product conmurnption,, ’000 b Id 
1994 1995 1996 1997 97share 
Gasolines? 3,794 4,078 4,296 4,559 23.6% 
Middle distillates 6,263 6,736 7,174 7,406 37.9% 
Rcsidual Sucl oil 4,009 3,976 3,956 3,919 20.1% 
Other products 9,004 3,240 3,418 3,600 18.4% 
Total 17,070 18,030 18,845 19,525 100.0% 
Sourw. BP Statistical Rciiiwi of World Encrgy 7includcs naphtha 
Singapore remains the centre of spot market trade in the 
region. Although it is not a swing refining centre like NW Europe 
or the Mediterranean since its refineries usually run flat out ~ ~ 
it is strategically located at the cross-roads of the region's product 
trading flows, its four refineries are owned by the oil majors, it has 
independent storage facilities, and it is an important financial and 
commodity trading centre in a region where government controls 
are still the norm rather than the exception. As a result, Singapore 
prices are used as an almost universal reference for the majority of 
product trade throughout the Asia Pacific region, even if the actual 
price levels are really being determined by arbitrage with other key 
5.4ipage 2 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 291/964 ---
5 Product markets 
markets in the Middle East or Europe. But Singapore's role as a 
price marker is now under threat as new refinery capacity in South 
Korea and Thailand has turned these former importers into 
exporters, creating the potential for alternative price markers. 
5.4.1 Gasoline 
Asia Pacific gasoline consumption is estimated at around 3.2 
million b/d for the region as a whole in 1997. It represents 16 per 
cent of total oil demand and has grown at over 5 per cent a year on 
average for the past five years. 
But the rapid expansion of new, more sophisticated, refinery 
capacity means that the Asia Pacific region became a net exporter 
of around 75,000 b/d of gasoline in 1997 and this volume is likely to 
be much higher in 1998. Japan and China are by far the biggest 
consumers of gasoline with Australia, India, Indonesia, New 
Zealand, South Korea and Taiwan also consuming large volumes 
(see Table 5.7). Over the past few years, trade in premium unleaded 
gasoline has replaced trade in leaded grades and 95 RON unleaded 
gasoline cargoes fob Singapore now provide the price reference for 
product trade in the region, although Korean refiners are trying to 
create their own local benchmark. Only Japan, South Korea and 
Taiwan have so far phased out all leaded gasoline sales, but India is 
planning to switch completely by 1999, closely followed by China, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand by the year 
2000. Indonesia's planned 1999 switch has been delayed by the 
economic crisis in that country. 
Table 5.7 Asia Pacific countr,y gasoline specifications, 1998 
Leaded Unleaded 
Australia 96 RON 0.3 Pb 96 & 91 RON 
China 97 RON 0.15 Pb 93 & 91 RON 
Hong Kong 98 RON 
India 93 & 87 RON 0.15 Pb 
Indonesia 98 RON 0.15 Pb 68 RON 
Japan 
Malaysia 97 bi 95 RON 100, 98 & 91 RON 
Ncw Zcaland 96 RON 0.16 -0.30 Pb 91 RON 
Pakistan 97 & 87 RON 0.84 Pb,80RON 0.42 p1, 
Philippines 95 & 83 RON 0.15 Pb 95 RON 
Singapore 97 RON 0.15 Pk) 98 & 97 RON 
South Korea 100 -95 RON 
Taiwan 97 & 95 RON 
Thailand 97,95 & 87 RON 0.15 Pb 98,95 & 92 RON 
Vietnam 83 RON 0.4 Ph 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4fpage 3

--- Page 292/964 ---
-- 
-- 
Oil Trading Manual 
As few of the Asia Pacific countries experience a winter season 
as such, most gasoline producers are not required to differentiate 
between winter and summer grades except in some northern Asian 
countries -such as Korea, Taiwan and Japan -where minor 
seasonal adjustments are made to gasoline specifications. Singapore 
gasoline cargoes typically have a Reid Vapour Pressure (RVP) of 9 
to 10 pounds per square inch (psi), which covers the seasonal range. 
Benzene is currently limited to a maximum of 5 per cent, but Japan 
is moving to a maximum of 1per cent from 1January 1999. 
Of the region's major consumers, Taiwan is the most important 
spot market buyer. Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and Australia are 
regular buyers of both reformate -a gasoline blendstock -and 
finished gasoline on the Singapore spot market during the peak 
summer driving season. India and Indonesia are both able to meet 
their domestic needs, while New Zealand imports from Australia 
and is seldom seen on the Singapore spot market. 
Singapore remains the main centre of gasoline spot trade in 
Asia. But the country's status as swing supplier for the region has 
been eroded over the past year as expansions of refining capacity in 
other Asian countries have cut the local dependency on imports. 
Export cargoes from Korea, China, Thailand and Malaysia are 
competing with Singapore's refineries for outlets into other net 
importing countries in the region as well as the growing export 
market into the Middle East. 
Taiwan remains the largest spot buyer in the Asia Pacific 
FOB Cargoes, 95 RON 
2a Mediterranean 
26 --
24 -
F 5-.22 4 
Qf 
20 
16 
14 
Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 Jan 98 
I 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.29 Gasoline: Singapore & Mediterranean prices 
5.4ipage 4 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 293/964 ---
5 Product markets 
region, buying monthly through open tenders which specify 
reformate rather than finished gasoline. Vietnam is a regular buyer 
of around 20,000 b/d of low octane gasoline as it has to import all its 
needs, mainly from China and Russia. Purchases are made mainly 
through quarterly term tenders. South Korea and Japan still tend 
to buy reformate -the main gasoline component -on the spot 
market during the peak driving summer months or when refineries 
are shut for maintenance work, but both are becoming agressive 
sellers of finished gasoline. Japanese imports of reformate are 
largely met by Abu Dhabi and Kuwait; but South Korean buyers 
are often seen buying reformate on the spot market in Singapore. 
Australia is a large buyer of finished motor gasoline on the 
Singapore spot market. Thailand is now a net exporter following 
expansions at its refineries. And the Philippines is a net importer of 
gasoline, but is seldom seen on the spot market. 
Singapore's four refineries still function as the region's swing 
producers. Independent storage facilities have boosted Singapore's 
capacity to make any grade of gasoline required in the region as 
they allow traders -as well as refiners -to blend gasoline. 
Indonesia became a gasoline exporter during the second half of 
1994, exporting between 600,000 and 1million barrels each month. 
Malaysia, which used to buy about 8,000 b/d on the spot market, 
had become a net exporter by the end of 1994 when it started 
selling 95 RON and 97 RON unleaded gasoline from its new 
100,000 b/d Malacca refinery. It also exports reformate regularly 
from Malacca to Japan. The Middle East countries are not 
significant suppliers of motor gasoline or reformate to Asia Pacific 
countries and other needs are usually met by arbitrage from 
Europe and the Mediterranean. 
But the region still lacks a clew gasoline price marker. Most 
cargoes in the Singapore gasoline market are now traded at a 
premium or discount to the PZatt’s published quotes of either the 95 
RON or' 97 RON unleaded grade. Previously, the regional marker 
grade was the Malaysian 97 RON leaded (0.15gil) grade, but spot 
trade in this grade has dried up since Malaysia stopped buying on 
the spot market after the start-up of its 100,000 b/d Malacca 
refinery and 95 RON unleaded gasoline has still not achieved 
sufficient liquidity to act as an undisputed benchmmk. Some 
gasoline and most reformate cargoes are traded against the 
published naphtha quotes. Indications of fixed price levels used to 
derived from the Singapore gasoline swaps market, but this has 
now dried up completely. Taiwanese state Chinese Petroleum 
Corporation (CPC), the region's largest spot buyer, awards its 
monthly tenders at a fixed price c+f basis. This tender is usually 
seen as an important indicator. of general price trends in the 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4fpage 5

--- Page 294/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Singapore market. Cargo volumes traded spot in the Singapore 
market vary between 25,000 barrels and 200,000 barrels. 
5.4.2 Naphtha 
Naphtha is used as a feedstock to produce both motor gasoline and 
ethylene for the petrochemical industry, but the most visible 
naphtha trade is for light petrochemical grades. North Asia has a 
well developed petrochemical industry which provides a ready 
market for paraffinic or full range naphtha. Japan has the largest 
and most well-established petrochemical market, with 7.6 million 
tonnedyear of ethylene capacity using around 500,000 b/d of 
naphtha feedstock, while South Korea's petrochemical complex has 
grown to become a major competitor for Japan importing 210,000 
b/d of naphtha in 1997 to feed its 4.9 million tonnedyear of ethylene 
capacity. Asia is structurally short of naphtha as a petrochemical 
feedstock, importing 500,000 b/d in 1997, mainly from the Middle 
East. Although naphtha demand has slumped in 1998 because of 
the economic crisis, Asia's imports need are still expected to add up 
to at least 400,000 b/d. 
Asian petrochemical end-users use naphtha for around 90 per 
cent of their feedstock requirements, compared with a world 
average of around 50 per cent. For this reason, security of supply is 
of particular importance to consumers, especially the Japanese 
petrochemical companies who prefer to purchase most of their 
supplies through term contracts with the Japanese trading houses, 
the shosha. The shosha in turn secure most of their supplies from 
Middle East producers, either directly or via the majors and 
western traders. Despite the economic crisis, Kuwait was still able 
to obtain a $6/tonne premium over Middle East quotes for term 
naphtha contracts in 1998. South Korean petrochemical companies 
were the biggest spot market buyers in Asia in 1997, but were 
absent from the market in early 1998 as domestic demand collapsed 
amid cash flow and credit problems. China is largely self-sufficient, 
although it occasionally appears on the spot market to buy limited 
volumes. Thailand began importing naphtha in 1994 to supply the 
new Thai Olefins petrochemical plant, while Indonesia remains a 
net exporter. 
The main sellers are Middle East producers -Saudi Arabia, 
Kuwait, UAE, Bahrain, Qatar, Yemen and Iran -which supplied 
17.5 million tonnes (430,000 b/d) in 1997. In the future, growing 
volumes of Middle East naphtha will come from new condensate 
splitters in Qatar and the UAE. Most of the remaining naphtha 
imports came from other Asian countries, but other sources -
including Mediterranean exporters Algeria, Egypt, Greece and 
5.4ipage 6 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 295/964 ---
-- 
5 Product markets 
4.00 T 
1.00 -
? Sitqapore = 0 
. . . . . . . C+F Japan 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.20 Naphtha: Arab Gulf & Japan minus Singapore prices 
Turkey, as well as Mexico and the US west coast -are becoming 
increasingly important sources of supply for the Asian market. 
The open specification delivered market c+f Japan is the most 
actively traded spot market. Spot and term prices across the Asia 
Pacific region are linked directly or indirectly to this market 
through freight netbacks to Singapore and the Middle East. The 
original open specification contract was drafted by Mitsubishi 
Corporation in 1986, and has been the industry standard ever 
since. It specifies the delivery of cargoes of between 22,500 and 
27,500 tonnes of physical naphtha delivered into Japan, allowing a 
"wet circle" of trade in naphtha to develop. As well as giving the 
option of physical delivery, the open specification contract is also 
~ ~ used as a forward paper market a "dry circle" for hedging 
physical positions. In this case, the standard cargo volume hedged 
is usually a standard 25,000 tonnes bee Chapter 7). 
Open specification material typically has a minimum of 65 per 
cent paraffins with a density of 0.6504'740 specific gravity (SG, at 
60°F and a maximum olefins content of 1 per cent. Petrochemical 
end users prefer light naphtha with a specific gravity of 0.650-
0.690 for their high ethylene yields, although full range naphtha 
with a high paraffinic yield is also considered desirable. These 
specifications are mainly met by cargoes from Middle Eastern 
refineries. Naphtha cargoes fi-om China, India, Australia, New 
Zealand or Indonesia are acceptable if they meet the above 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4fpage 7

--- Page 296/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
specifications as well as additional restrictions concerning chlorine, 
mercury and arsenic. 
Singapore spot price assessments are derived using an MR 
freight netback from Japan and applying a conversion factor of nine 
barrels per tonne. But some trade is also conducted on a fixed price 
basis and there is a moderately active Singapore naphtha swaps 
market which provides an alternative hedging mechanism to the 
Japan forward market (see Chapter 10). 
5.4.3 Jetkerosine 
Jetkerosine was the fastest growing oil product in the Asia Pacific 
region until the economic crisis undermined demand. Rapid 
economic development has encouraged exponential growth of air 
travel for both business and leisure activities, but this was badly hit 
in 1998. In addition, kerosine is widely used as a domestic heating 
fuel in north Asia and demand for this product reaches a seasonal 
high in winter. Smaller markets also exist for kerosine as a burning 
fuel for lighting, cooking and heating in some of the developing 
countries, mainly in the rural areas of the Indian subcontinent, 
Vietnam and Indonesia. In 1997, Asia Pacific jet fuel demand was 
900,000 b/d and heating kerosine demand was 1.2 million b/d, 
making a total of more than 10 per cent of total product 
consumption, a much higher proportion than in either Europe or 
the US. 
The Asia Pacific region is usually a net importer of jetkerosine -mainly from the Middle East -but the combination of a mild 
winter and the unexpected economic crisis turned it temporarily 
into a net exporter during the first half of 1998 as high stocks 
depressed local prices. Jetkerosine imports averaged 250,000 b/d in 
1997 and the supply balance was expected to shift slowly to a slight 
overall surplus by the year 2000 with the addition of new refining 
capacity. Demand for imports into two of the main consumers in 
the region, Japan and India is still expected to rise. But increased 
availabilities from new refineries in Malaysia, Taiwan and China, 
as well as the region's main export centre Singapore are boosting 
regional supply. And South Korea's import requirements have 
fallen sharply after the recent expansion in refinery capacity. 
Four distinct grades of jetkerosine are traded in the Asia 
Pacific: 
1) Jet A1 -used as a commercial aircraft fuel and conforming to 
the DERD 2494 specification. 
5.4/page 8 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 297/964 ---
5 Product markets 
2) Superior kerosine oil or illuminating kerosine ISKO) -mainly 
used in the rural areas of the Indian subcontinent for cooking 
and lighting. 
3) Dual purpose kerosine (DPK) -mainly used in north Asia for 
heating. Dual purpose kerosine, as its name suggests, can also 
be used as an aviation fuel. 
4) Pure kerosine -used mainly for heating. 
India still buys significant volumes of kerosine through 
monthly spot purchasing tenders issued by the state-owned Indian 
Oil Company (IOC) that provide a good guide to price levels in the 
Middle East. Spot cargoes are traded relative to the mean of Platt�s 
fob Arab Gulf price assessment (MOPAG). Cargoes are never 
traded on a fixed-price basis as the Gulf quotation is a netback from 
the Singapore market minus a freight differential. IOC also 
frequently tenders to buy jet Al, the amount depending on the level 
of domestic supplies. 
Middle Eastern cargoes usually cover the requirements to the 
Indian west coast, while cargoes sourced from Singapore are 
usually used to supply the eastern ports. Although Indian imports 
of kerosine were deregulated to meet booming demand, imports by 
private and foreign companies are still subject to some government 
controls. India’s other kerosine requirements are covered through 
term contracts with the main Middle East suppliers which now play 
an increasing role in India’s product supply arrangements. 
Singapore’s refineries produce around 170,000 b/d of jet, more 
than two thirds of which is available for export. The physical fob 
market sees trade in cargo lots of up to 250,000 barrels, 
occasionally on a fixed price basis, but mainly at a floating price 
related to Platt�s fob Singapore quotes. Trade usually takes place 
for. lifting within a 10-40 day time-frame, physical barrels rarely 
being traded very far. forward. There is also an active jet swaps 
market which trades at a differential to Platt�s Singapore gasoil 
quotations (see Chapter 10). 
One of the largest spot buyers of fob Singapore jet A1 was 
Indonesia which imported 60,000 b/d in 1997, but demand has 
collapsed in 1998. Malaysia also produces a small amount of 
illuminating kerosine -a cargo a month -around 7,500 b/d -at 
its Kerteh refinery which is usually exported at a premium over 
Singapore prices. The 100,000 b/d Petronas refinery at Malacca 
produces a similar amount of dual purpose kerosine which covers 
the country’s domestic requirements. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4fpage 9

--- Page 298/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
3.00 - FOB Arab Gulf ~ 
,.:> . . . . . .. C+F Japan 
.\ 
-
m2 000 1 
yt 
 Singapore = 0 
-3.00 -
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
F@re 5.21 Jet / kerosine: Arab Gulf & Japan minus Singapore prices 
Japan and South Korea normally import kerosine for heating 
purposes during the winter, although Japanese refiners also buy 
bonded (non-taxable) .jet for aviation use and normal jet which can 
be desulphurised into pure heating kerosine. The Middle East used 
to supply much of Japan's and South Korea's kerosine needs, but 
rising throughputs in Japan and South Korea have eroded the 
demand for imports. The Middle East kerosine grade exported from 
Gulf refineries in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab 
Emirates is usually good quality DPK, but cargoes will often be sold 
into the Indian subcontinent to cover SKO burning requirements. 
Most Middle East exports are through term contracts to 
customers and, as a result, spot trade is thin. Kuwait has become 
the main spot seller since the restoration and expansion of its 
refining capacity after the Gulf crisis to a level of nearly 1 million 
b/d. It now dominates selling into most of India's monthly spot 
tenders for middle distillates and has cornered many of the import 
markets in the region with term contracts into India, Pakistan, 
Indonesia, South Korea, Japan and the US Defense Fuel Supply 
Center. 
5.4.4 Gasoil 
Gasoil, which is used as automotive diesel, high speed diesel and 
marine diesel, has provided the main engine for growth in oil 
demand across the Asia Pacific region. The booming economies in 
5.4ipage 10 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 299/964 ---
5 Product markets 
many countries in the region, such as China, India, Indonesia, 
South Korea, Vietnam and Thailand have recently seen double digit 
increases in gasoil consumption, and overall demand has been 
growing at more than 5 per cent in recent years. In 1997, Asia 
Pacific demand for all forms of gasoil averaged 5.7 million b/d, 29 
per cent of the region's total oil consumption. 
Automotive diesel is the main transport fuel for most of the 
developing countries in the Asia Pacific region, with marine diesel 
used for small water-borne vessels. Gasoil is also extensively used 
in Vietnam and Indonesia for power generation -the Philippines 
has now switched away from gasoil in favour of fuel oil for the bulk 
of its oil-fired power generation. Gasoil use in the agricultural 
sector is high in China and India, especially during the Chinese 
summer harvest season, and the post.-monsoon season in India. 
Table 5.8 Asia Pacific gasoil sulphur specification limits, 1998 
0.05% 0.25% 0.5% 17a 
Japan lndia Singapore Vietnam 
South Korea Malaysia India 
Taiwan Indonesia Nepal 
Hong Kong Philippines Pakistan 
China Sri Lanka 
Thailand Bangladesh 
India 
Australia 
Hong Kong 
nufonioti i~cdrew/ 
Gasoil trade in the Asia Pacific and Middle East encompasses a 
wide range of different specification requirements (see Table 5.8). 
National governments have imposed sulphur limits in an attempt 
to reduce sulphur emissions and pollution. The sulphur content is 
the most important factor in determining the price differential 
between grades across the region. Once again, Japan has led the 
way within the region towards burning cleaner fuels. Sulphur 
content in Japanese diesel was cut to 0.05 per cent by 1996 and this 
was extended to heating gasoil in October 1997. Other countries are 
moving in this direction, albeit at a slower pace. South Korea and 
Taiwan also plan to cut sulphur content to 0.05 per cent in 1998. 
And Thailand is aiming to follow suit in 1999. Hong Kong cut the 
sulphur content for automotive diesel to 0.05 per cent in April 1997, 
but the industrial sector is still allowed to use 0.5 per cent sulphur 
gasoil. 
Since most of the Asia Pacific region lies within the equatorial 
climate zone, large areas of the regional market are not required to 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 11

--- Page 300/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
meet the low pour points necessary in the northern hemisphere. 
The most widely used gasoil grade therefore has a relatively high 
pour point range of 6-9°C. But low pour gasoils are still required in 
north Asia, where automotive fuels must be able to remain 
functional at much lower temperatures. Northern China and Hong 
Kong require a maximum pour point of 0°C in the winter season, 
while Japan and South Korea require maximum pour points of 
-20°C and -5°C respectively. The minimum cetane index for 
Japanese automotive diesel is 50. 
As patterns of trade vary according to seasonal variations and 
product specification requirements, gasoil markets in the Asia 
Pacific region can attract exports from all around the world, and 
cargoes from the swing refining centres of Singapore and the 
Middle East are frequently supplemented by product from NW 
Europe, the Mediterranean and the US. Like other main products, 
demand growth for gasoil slowed abruptly in 1998 leaving refiners 
holding high stocks which depressed prices, choking off the normal 
flow of imports into the region. But the high sulphur content of 
Asian gasoil has limited the destination for exports to markets in 
Latin America. 
Singapore plays a key role as the region's major supplier of 
gasoil. Gasoil accounts for around 35 per cent of Singapore refiners' 
output, with exports from Singapore at just below 300,000 b/d. The 
largest volume of gasoil from Singapore is exported to Hong Kong, 
which supplies the rapidly developing neighbouring provinces of 
-4.00 -
Jan 90 Jan 91 Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan94 Jan95 Jan96 Jan97 Jan98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.22 Gasoil: Arab Gulf & Japan minus Singapore prices 
5.4ipage 12 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 301/964 ---
5 Product markets 
southern China. The bulk of the rest of Singapore's gasoil exports 
go into neighbouring Thailand and Malaysia, or directly into China. 
Soaring gasoil consumption has made China a major buyer and an 
important influence in the Asian market, but government 
restrictions on imports imposed from May 1994 have made Chinese 
buying erratic and smuggling is widespread. Domestic price 
controls were eased in June 1998 after bureaucratic delays meant 
that it was cheaper to import gasoil than to refine it locally. 
Chinese gasoil demand accounts for a tenth of total Asian gasoil 
demand and imports averaged 150,000 b/d in 1997. 
Indonesia and Malaysia -two of the largest crude oil 
producers in the region -do not have enough refinery capacity to 
cover domestic demand and both are regular buyers of 0.5 per cent 
sulphur low pour gasoil. Indonesia usually buys on a delivered 
basis which generally attracts arbitrage cargoes from outside the 
region, rather than Singapore barrels. 
North Asian countries -Japan and South Korea -are unable 
to cover their low sulphur low pour gasoil requirements from 
Singapore. Product specifications are much tighter than in south- 
east Asia and spot imports have become rare since higher domestic 
refinery runs have made Japan and South Korea increasingly self- 
sufficient in gasoil. Any shortfalls in north Asian supply are usually 
met by term liftings of "pure", or straight run, gasoil from Algeria 
or Italy in the Mediterranean, which typically has a very low 
(0.05-0.2 per cent) sulphur content and pour point (-15 to -2O'C). 
Australia and New Zealand also use and produce low pour 
gasoil for their cold seasons but growing domestic demand has 
ended the export of small volumes of superior quality gasoil to 
Japan and South Korea in recent years. Instead, Australia looks set 
to become a regular importer of gasoil, with majors such as RP, 
Shell, Mobil and the Chevron/Texaco joint venture Caltex 
importing from international affiliates and sometimes from the 
international spot market. 
The monthly spot buying tender issued by the Indian Oil 
Corporation is the most transparent element in the 1 per cent 
sulphur gasoil market, although term purchases are becoming 
increasingly important (see Section 5.4.4). India also buys 0.25 and 
0.5 per cent sulphur gasoil to supply markets in urban areas. 
Tender volumes are usually highest late in the year, when 
agricultural demand rises after the end of the monsoon season. 
Imports into the east coast are a standard 45,000 tonnes, while 
imports into the west coast are 30,000 tonnes, due to draught 
restrictions at India's ports. Imports into the east coast are most 
commonly priced against Singapore spot price assessments, while 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 13

--- Page 302/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
imports into the west coast are usually priced against Middle East 
price assessments. 
Middle East refiners are now producing more of the lower 
sulphur grades of gasoil to meet the specifications of countries east 
of the Indian subcontinent, but the average sulphur content of 
exporters such as Kuwait remains around 0.2 per cent, well above 
the 0.05 per cent level now set in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. 
Rising domestic demand in some Middle Eastern states, such as 
Saudi Arabia and Iran, has also cut the amount of gasoil available 
for export from the region in the last few years, although recent 
cuts in domestic price subsidies in both countries have slowed the 
growth in demand. 
Most of the gasoil exported from the Middle East is sold on 
term contracts. Spot trade is usually based on either Platt’s 
Singapore or Middle East price assessments, plus a premium for 
east of Suez destinations or -as with Abu Dhabi -half on posted 
prices and half on spot market assessments. Saudi Aramco and Abu 
Dhabi's state oil company, Adnoc, both use a 5050 mixture of 
Platt’s and Argus price assessments. Argus produces a daily 
assessment of premia talked over the mean of Platt’s Arab Gulf 
(MOPAG) price assessments, and these have been used in addition 
to the Platt’s price assessment by companies such as Shell and 
Caltex in term and spot sales. There is also an active gasoil swaps 
market based on Platt’s Singapore price quotations (see Chapter 
10) 
5.4.5 Low sulphur waxy residue 
The low sulphur waxy residue (LSWR) market is one of the most 
opaque product markets in the Asia Pacific region, both because of 
illiquidity and because of its complicated pricing structure making 
it difficult to establish a reliable buy-sell range. The LSWR market 
is no bigger than 200,000 bfd, yet at least three different pricing 
mechanisms are used. 
LSWR is traded in two forms - straight run and 
crackedmixed -both for direct burning in electricity power 
generation and as a feedstock. Indonesia's state oil company, 
Pertamina, which exports around 3.5 million barrels per month of 
crackedmixed 0.2 per cent sulphur material, is the largest regional 
producer of LSWR. Asia consumes around 1.1million b/d of LSWR 
in total, but demand has slumped in 1998 as utilities were left with 
high stocks because of the mild winter and regional economic crisis. 
The most actively traded LSWR market is for Indonesian 
crackedmixed material, which is mainly sold to Japanese utilities 
for direct burning in power stations. Japan has the region's 
5.4ipage 14 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 303/964 ---
-- 
5 Product markets 
strictest limitations on the sulphur content of oil for use in power 
generation -allowing just 0.2 per cent sulphur by weight -and 
burns a mixture of low sulphur crude oil, such as Indonesia’s Minas 
or Duri, domestically produced LSWR and imported LSWR. Imports 
of LSWR average just over 100,000 b/d, but can vary widely 
depending on weather conditions in Japan, particularly during the 
summer season. Peak demand is typically in the summer when 
domestic air conditioning boosts electricity demand. 
Pertamina now sells LSWR direct to customers after 
disbanding its marketing affiliates from July 1998. The floating 
formula price is now based on a straight average of Argus, Platt�s, 
RIM and FEOP assessments. Virtually all spot LSWR trade is 
therefore done relative to the Pertamina formula. It should be 
noted that LSWR price assessments are fob Indonesia. 
When Japanese demand is limited -usually during the 
autumn or early spring -surplus barrels are sometimes sold into 
the US market either for utility burning or as a refinery feedstock. 
In 1998, weak demand and low prices have created opportunities 
for exports to Latin America and Europe, where LSWR is being 
purchased by Enel, the Italian power utility, instead of low sulphur 
fuel oil. LSWR is usually blended en route to the US or in storage 
prior to delivery in order to meet the standard utility burning 
specifications. Because Indonesian LSWR is typically 
“cracked/mixed” material -that is, a mixture of cracked and 
straight run LSWR -the straight run component can be used by 
-LSWR 
35 -- I.: .. . . .. . Minas .. 
5 
Figure 5.23 Low sulphur waxy residue & Minus crude prices 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 15

--- Page 304/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
some US Gulf coast refiners as a feedstock for vacuum gasoil units. 
When spot trade is more active into the US than into Japan, 
the value of Indonesian LSWR can be assessed using netbacks from 
the US market. If the LSWR is to be used as a refinery feedstock, 
prices are usually set a discount to West Texas Intermediate (WTI) 
crude for the month of delivery. But when it is sold into the 
burning market, the netback is based on spot assessments for 0.3 
per cent sulphur high pour residual fuel oil for the month of 
delivery, allowing for the lower thermal content of LSWR. 
Indonesian LSWR has a thermal content of 144,000 Btuharrel, 
below the standard US requirement of 148,000 Btuharrel, which 
typically translates into a discount of around 40 centsharrel. The 
US utility, ConEd, also sets a maximum pour point specification of 
110"F, which may be exceeded by some cargoes of Indonesian 
LSWR, which can have a pour point of between 105 and 120°F. US 
import duties also vary depending on API gravity. Duties are 23 
centsharrel for imports with a gravity of 24.7"API or lower and 28 
centsharrel for imports with a higher API gravity. 
The market for straight run LSWR in Singapore is even less 
liquid than that for crackearnixed material. Esso Singapore is the 
only refiner which regularly sells spot cargoes of 0.3 per cent 
sulphur LSWR -around 500,000 barrels per month in cargoes of 
around 200,000 barrels each. Most straight run LSWR in Singapore 
is typically sold at a premium of around $1.50/barrel over the 
Platt’s straight run price quotation, fob Singapore. 
5.4.6 Residual fuel oil 
In the Asia Pacific region, virtually all the high sulphur fuel oil 
traded -both cracked and straight run -ends up in the burning 
market, either for power stations or marine bunkers. Only straight 
run low sulphur waxy residue -sold primarily from Singapore and 
Malaysia -is actively marketed as a refinery feedstock. Demand 
for fuel oil by power utilities is falling as natural gas production in 
the region grows. The three countries which account for a large 
part of the region's demand for high sulphur fuel oil -Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand -are all planning to increase 
gas burning for power generation. Asia Pacific demand for fuel oil 
averaged 3.9 million bld in 1997, down nearly 1 per cent on the 
previous year despite strong growth in bunker demand. 
Tighter environmental legislation is gradually changing the 
structure of the residual fuel oil burning markets in Asia. Some 
countries have already taken the lead by cutting the sulphur 
content of utility fuel and low sulphur grades account for around 45 
per cent of regional fuel oil consumption. Japan is at the forefi-ont 
5.4ipage 16 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 305/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Outright Ditlerential 
180 30 
Cargoes, 3.5%S 
160 180 cst FOB Arab Gulf 25 
140 180 cst FOB Sirgapwe ~ 
180 cst -380cst 
120 20 
g 100 mr 
r 
0 15 & 5 80 5 
60 10 
40 
5 
20 
0 0 
Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan Jan 
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 
source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 5.24 Residual fuel oil: Singapore & Ara.b Gulf prices 
and now only burns oil with a sulphur content of 0.2 per cent or 
less in its power stations. Taiwan cut sulphur limits to 0.5 per cent 
in 1996 and South Korea is introducing a limit of 0.3 per cent for 
fuel oil burnt in urban areas from July 1998. Singapore and 
Thailand have shifted from burning high sulphur fuel oil (3.5 per 
cent) to burning predominantly intermediate grades (2 per cent) 
over the last few years. The Thai utility, Egat, is already using 0.5 
per cent sulphur grades in urban areas. China has been importing 
medium sulphur fuel oil for burning in major cities since 1996 and 
is moving to 1.5 per cent sulphur fuel oil for the Shanghai area. 
Malaysia and the Philippines are expected to move to 1 per cent 
sulphur by 2000. But Indonesia continues to burn high sulphur 
material as it plans to switch to gas. 
Bunkers provide the backbone of the fuel oil market in 
Singapore, but cargoes are also sold into the utility burning 
markets of China, Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and 
Indonesia. Spot fuel oil is sold at both fixed and floating prices in 
Singapore. The main spot sellers are Singapore refiners, Korean 
refiners, and western and Singapore-based traders. The main 
buyers are traders and companies that supply regional end-users, 
power utilities and the Singapore bunker market. 
Fuel oil spot trade in the Asia Pacific region is often done on a 
fixed price basis either fob or c+f Singapore and the two main 
traded grades are 3.5 per cent sulphur 180 cst and 3.5 per cent 
sulphur 380 cst. Prices for 180 cst material used to bear a close 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 17

--- Page 306/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
relation to Singapore's Simex fuel oil contract, but the contract is 
no longer traded despite being relaunched with new specifications 
in April 1997 and the market now uses swaps for hedging instead 
(see Chapter 8). When physical activity is limited or the outlook for 
prices uncertain, buyers and sellers often prefer to trade at a 
floating price differential over Singapore market assessments. In 
these circumstances, fuel oil is typically traded at a premium of 
$1-2 over Platt’s fob Singapore quotation. 
With a principal diet of heavy sour crudes from the Middle 
East, all of Singapore's refiners are sellers of high sulphur fuel oil. 
Korean refiners, who have only limited upgrading capacity, are 
regular sellers of high sulphur fuel oil to the north Asian market, 
particularly China. The Singapore and Korean refiners all supply 
their own bunker sales as well as the cargo market. Taiwan sells 
around 60,000 tonnedmonth (13,000 b/d) of high sulphur fuel oil in 
regular monthly tenders, while buying low sulphur fuel oil for its 
own domestic consumption. Japan's high sulphur fuel oil output is 
largely confined to its own bunker market. Exports of medium and 
low sulphur fuel oil are made to China from third party processing 
at the refineries on the southern Japanese island of Okinawa. 
The other main source of residual fuel oil for the region is the 
Middle East. Much of the residual fuel oil output of this region is 
straight run material. With an active bunkering market centred on 
Fujairah at the mouth of the ArabianPersian Gulf, much of the 
region's residual fuel oil output is sold directly to local bunker 
suppliers. 
Exports leaving the Gulf can head east or west, depending on 
market conditions, but westbound sales are increasingly becoming 
the exception to the rule. Exports to the East will usually end up 
being sold directly into the utility end-users in the region, or else 
used for blending in Singapore to supply the bunker market. 
Singapore has become the world's largest bunkering centre in 
the last three years, with bunker sales of more than 300,000 Wd in 
1997 -about half of Asia Pacific bunker demand. Bunker sales 
now outstrip high sulphur fuel oil output from Singapore's own 
refineries, and Singapore fuel oil demand has for many years 
attracted imports fr-om Venezuela, the US west coast, the Middle 
East and the Mediterranean. 
But other bunkering centres are emerging to take some of 
Singapore's market share. South Korea, which now has large 
surpluses of domestically produced high sulphur fuel oil, is an 
active bunker supplier to the north Asian market selling around 
140,000 b/d in 1997. And the port of Fujairah at the mouth of the 
Middle East Gulf has also grown to prominence as the bunkering 
terminal for most of the oil tanker traffic emerging from the Gulf, 
5.4ipage 18 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 307/964 ---
5 Product markets 
although sales were disrupted by the collapse of the Greek trader 
Metro in early 1998. 
The shift towards lower sulphur fuel oil specifications in 
several major Asian consuming countries has created a market for 
medium and low sulphur grade fuel oil over the last few years, 
greatly increasing the demand for low sulphur crudes -mainly 
from west Africa -by refiners. But the region is expected to 
remain short of the required medium and low sulphur fuel oil 
grades. Asia Pacific demand for low sulphur fuel oil averaged 1.6 
million b/d in 1997, but only 85 per cent was produced in the region 
leaving around 240:OOO b/d to be imported. 
Japan and Korea now produce some low sulphur grades, and 
new refineries being built in Thailand ae able to produce low 
sulphur fuel oil to meet that country's requirements, but the bulk of 
supplies have had to be imported, either fiom the US west coast or 
north-west Europe. However, these volumes are set to fall as west 
coast refiners build more conversion capacity to meet local demand 
for lighter products. Low sulphur exports from the US are used by 
traders for blending higher sulphur material for selling into the 
Asia Pacific market. If US supplies are cut, blenders will have to 
look further afield to regions such as West Africa and South 
America as they seek to supply Asia's growing low sulphur demand. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 5.4ipage 19

--- Page 308/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 309/964 ---
Appendix 5.1 
Spot product prices, 1993 
$/bar re I Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 21.95 22.69 23.47 24.66 24.91 23.67 22.76 22.14 21.55 21.99 19.69 16.57 
Naphtha 19.83 19.54 19.30 19.88 20.53 19.48 18.43 17.83 16.81 17.58 16.60 14.61 
Jet kerosine 24.23 24.59 25.00 24.46 23.91 23.13 22.10 22.20 22.77 24.29 23.69 21.59 
Gasoil 22.57 23.04 23.74 24.25 23.61 22.21 21.48 21.47 21.97 22.91 22.09 19.46 
SRfuel 0.7%S* 15.59 16.20 16.82 17.21 17.45 15.78 15.46 14.98 14.19 14.49 12.08 11.62 
Heavyfuell.O%S 15.20 16.31 16.07 17.42 16.26 14.90 15.68 14.65 13.83 14.33 12.19 11.15 
Heavyfuel3.O%S 11.39 11.35 12.14 12.31 11.50 9.69 9.59 9.75 9.80 9.81 9.83 8.81 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 97 .15Pb 22.73 23.20 23.90 25.77 25.80 24.68 23.86 23.69 23.04 23.34 21.19 18 19 
Naphtha 19.56 19.19 18.94 19.64 20.29 19.16 18.18 17.43 16.60 17.28 16.25 14.31 
Jet kerosine* 23.41 23.59 23.74 23.37 22.75 21.99 20.73 20.65 21.35 23.06 22.56 20.18 
Gasoil 22.74 22.98 23.36 24.07 23.57 21.81 21.18 21.54 21.79 23.02 22.41 19.87 
Heavy fuel I.O%S 15.48 16.77 16.76 17.63 16.76 15.23 15.85 14.84 13.84 14.33 12.22 11 31 
Heavyfuel3.5%5 11.90 11.64 12.12 12.34 11.73 9.71 9.10 9.79 9.79 9.72 9.26 8.20 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 23.61 23.17 25.02 26.39 26.79 25.29 24.19 25.32 22.96 23.38 20.41 17.72 
Jet kerosine 23.52 24.14 24.90 24.13 24.51 23.36 21.84 22.18 23.13 24.86 23.44 19 80 
No 2 heating oil 22.49 23.52 24.34 23.38 23.08 22.31 21.07 21.59 21.97 22.76 21.35 18.43 
No 6fuel 0.3%S 17.96 18.39 20.24 20.13 18.60 17.05 16.48 16.88 16.52 16.39 14.89 13.75 
No 6fuel I.O%S 14.85 15.02 15.73 16.79 15.64 14.98 14.94 14.11 14.38 14.63 12.61 11 88 
No6fuel3.O%S 12.43 11.25 11.47 12.55 12.29 11.26 10.71 10.82 10.67 10.72 9.64 8.84 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 92 unl 22.73 22.50 25.01 26.87 26.77 24.45 22.91 23.73 21.75 22.1 1 18.99 16 58 
No 2 heating oil 21.47 22.52 23.01 22.50 22.43 21.39 20.18 20.74 21.15 21.91 20.41 17.50 
No6fuel I.O%S 13.35 13.55 14.40 15.81 15.15 13.97 14.01 13.13 13.04 13.16 11.54 10.82 
Heavyfuel3.OY0S 11.22 10.95 11.32 12.22 11.39 9.85 9.23 10.14 10.27 10.15 8.13 7.82 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 97 .15Pb n.a. 24.56 25.10 26.78 26.70 25.91 22.81 23.66 23.36 23.44 22.06 18.94 
Naphtha 18.44 18.48 18.70 19.20 19.39 19.03 17.64 16.61 14.80 15.70 15.29 13.34 
Jet kerosine 25.33 25.35 25.40 25.85 25.84 24.29 22.98 22.61 22.56 24.95 24.71 22 51 
Gasoil LP 24.83 24.96 24.80 25.71 25.92 24.00 22.79 22.72 22.93 24.25 23.48 21.44 
LSWR 18.23 17.31 16.50 19.14 22.52 20.36 14.09 13.07 12.63 12.46 10.10 8.24 
Heavyfuel380cst 11.22 12.19 12.51 13.14 12.66 11.03 9.95 10.95 11.18 10.91 8.86 8.36 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. ’FOB. 
Appendix 5.llpage 1

--- Page 310/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Spot product prices, 1994 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95unl 16.82 17.69 17.63 20.03 21.17 21.79 22.13 24.30 20.99 21.08 20.69 18.95 
Naphtha 14.46 15.13 14.78 15.83 17.30 17.87 18.48 18.13 17.69 18.71 19.40 18.72 
Jet kerosine 21.16 20.36 20.13 20.75 20.80 20.82 21.16 21.51 21.69 22.57 22.37 20.51 
Gasoil 19.69 19.26 18.64 20.27 20.27 20.33 20.53 20.69 20.29 20.62 20.68 19.13 
SRfuel 0.7%Sk 13.41 14.59 13.37 13.96 15.07 16.01 17.14 15.61 14.40 16.51 16.90 16.39 
Heavyfuell.O%S 13.63 14.71 13.30 13.42 14.16 15.08 16.43 16.00 14.19 17.17 17.40 17.04 
Heavyfuel3.O%S 9.97 12.32 11.89 11.54 13.12 13.03 15.19 13.73 11.71 14.27 16.29 15.44 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline97 .15Pb 18.00 18.77 18.91 21.20 22.49 22.93 23.04 25.47 21.63 21.06 21.35 19.88 
Naphtha 14.09 14.68 14.48 15.52 17.05 17.55 18.18 17.97 17.37 18.33 19.08 18.38 
Jet kerosine* 20.15 18.78 18.70 19.13 19.14 19.17 19.62 19.99 20.07 21.06 21.14 19.27 
Gasoil 19.78 19.18 18.34 19.75 19.93 19.98 20.08 20.27 19.73 20.23 20.84 19.38 
Heavyfuel I.O%S 13.61 14 66 13.30 13 42 14.16 15.23 16.63 16 05 14.34 17.52 17 73 17.16 
Heavyfuel3.5%S 9.70 11.62 11.23 10.97 12.76 12.40 14.98 13.90 11.56 14.50 16.21 14.86 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 20.49 22.04 21 .I3 23.26 24.53 25.49 27.36 27.43 22.24 24.82 24.1 0 21.22 
Jet Kerosine 23.73 24 13 20.03 20 74 21.16 21.60 22.53 22 03 21-30 22.22 22 63 21.51 
No 2 heatingoil 21.18 22.85 19.65 19.85 20.24 20.80 21.10 20.87 20.16 20.39 20.90 20.47 
No 6fuel 0.3%S 17.65 19.66 15.72 15.01 15.29 16.34 17.89 16.71 14.85 16.26 16.66 17.63 
NO6fuel I.O%S 15.32 1756 13.21 13 09 14.07 15.51 16.78 15 59 12.84 14.60 14 83 16.50 
No 6fuel 3.0%S 10.69 11.28 10.06 9.84 10.74 12.69 14.65 14.00 11.14 12.80 13.90 14.59 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 92 unl 19.04 19.78 20.97 22.36 22.98 24.33 25.82 25.24 20.50 22.10 20.76 19.01 
No 2 heatingoil 19.47 19.49 17.93 18.78 19.32 19.85 20.18 20.01 19.48 19.55 20.05 19.44 
No 6fuel I.O%S 12.12 13.13 12.03 12.76 13.58 14.63 15.38 14.43 12.73 14.01 14.30 14.43 
Heavyfuel 3.0%S 9.55 9 86 9.25 10 81 11.39 12.89 14.38 12 88 10.64 13.14 13 73 13.33 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 97 .15Pb 18.77 19.89 19.10 22.09 22.42 23.34 22.78 23.64 20.02 21.18 20.99 18.48 
Naphtha 13.40 13.62 13.29 14.63 16.16 16.80 17.55 17.69 17.55 18.16 18.46 18.52 
Jet kerosine 22.16 21 36 20.63 21 47 21.01 20.24 20.72 20 60 21.82 23.20 24 07 22.78 
Gasoil LP 21.06 20.56 19.62 20.96 21.10 20.15 20.57 20.44 20.67 21.43 21.93 21.63 
LSWR 10.13 11.16 10.48 11.35 12.71 14.03 18.20 18.89 12.96 12.79 13.39 13.20 
Heavyfuel38Ocst 10.45 10.03 9.41 11.80 13.35 13.34 15.55 15.11 11.74 13.40 14.45 13.58 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. *FOB. 
Appendix 5.llpage 2

--- Page 311/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Spot product prices, 1995 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 19.30 19.91 20.67 23.13 24.33 22.68 20.13 21.21 21.26 20.38 22.12 20.05 
Naphtha 17.96 18.66 19.18 18.76 20.61 19.99 16.92 17.41 18.03 16.93 16.87 17.74 
Jet kerosine 20.69 21.06 21.61 22.20 21.94 21.36 21.87 21.75 22.89 22.22 22.80 25.10 
Gasoil 19.68 19.91 20.13 21.74 21.61 20.58 20.35 20.86 21.41 20.17 21.31 23.57 
SR fuel 0.7%S* 17.22 17.24 17.25 18.53 19.61 17.81 16.14 15.70 16.03 15.70 16.15 17.90 
Heavy fuel I.O%S 17.59 17.60 17.50 17.77 18.99 17.54 15.33 14.16 15.37 15.91 16.39 18.79 
Heavy fuel 3.0%S 16.97 16.56 16.39 16.50 16.92 14.03 13.12 13.02 13.63 13.54 13.72 16.31 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 97 .15Pb 20.47 21 22 21.45 23.33 24.60 23.64 20.85 22.30 22.68 21.77 23.23 21 .I2 
Naphtha 17.67 18.38 18.83 18.33 20.33 19.68 16.81 17.21 17.80 16.67 16.42 17.38 
Jet kerosine* 19.57 19.62 20.27 20.91 20.48 19.91 20.23 19.67 21.05 20.66 21.50 22.98 
Gasoil 20.20 20.14 19.49 21.19 21.28 20.43 19.83 20.62 21.59 20.35 21.44 24.16 
Heavy fuel 1.O%S 17.68 17.39 17.56 18.24 19.22 17.47 15.18 14.04 15.58 16.19 16.45 18.68 
Heavy fuel 3.5%S 16.75 16.46 16.01 15.98 16.69 14.17 12.88 12.77 14.06 14.48 14.31 15.99 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 23.62 24.01 23.10 28.39 30.37 27.10 23.25 24.72 25.65 21.77 22.72 25.94 
Jet kerosine 20.76 20.40 19.76 21.87 22.55 21.26 20.75 21.98 22.90 22.41 23.19 25.22 
No 2 heating oil 20.33 20.15 19.43 20.95 21.23 20.13 19.66 20.74 21.22 20.65 21.89 24.37 
No 6 fuel 0.3%s 18.33 17.45 16.95 16.28 17.68 17.22 15.74 15.93 16.03 16.48 17.73 20.98 
No 6fuel 1 O%S 16.80 15.80 16.10 16.28 17.59 17.05 15.08 14.16 14.58 14.66 15.61 19.01 
No 6fuel 3.0%S 15.16 14.90 15.27 15.43 16.72 15.91 12.90 12.48 13.18 13.03 13.04 15.68 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 92 unl 21.39 21.72 22.21 26.62 28.27 24.96 22.04 22.54 22.22 20.08 20.73 21.75 
No 2 heating oil 19.25 19.20 18.48 20.28 21.05 19.54 18.88 19.98 20.38 19.71 20.88 22.59 
No 6fuel I.O%S 14.35 14.69 14.69 14.98 16.69 16.16 13.40 13.02 13.88 13.94 13.95 16.34 
Heavy fuel 3.0%S 13.30 14.41 14.50 15.01 16.30 15.08 12.34 11.98 12.23 12.57 12.63 14.85 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 21.33 21.44 22.87 22.64 22.76 23.76 24.02 24.35 23.53 21.77 22.97 22.03 
Naphtha 17.99 17.76 18.37 19.08 19.14 18.79 17.33 16.43 16.42 15.82 15.89 17.07 
Jet kerosine 22.61 22.72 21.54 22.15 22.96 22.29 21.04 20.83 21.63 22.66 24.72 28.26 
Gasoil LP 21.38 21.36 21.14 22.16 23.02 22.41 21.09 20.36 20.49 20.48 21.98 24.34 
LSWR 13.66 13.66 14.30 14.87 15.64 14.57 12.97 12.84 13.81 14.09 14.99 16.56 
Heavy fuel 380cst 14.67 15.60 16.15 16.21 15.99 14.22 12.75 12.78 12.59 13.61 14.59 16.56 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. "FOB. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 Appendix 5.lIpage 3

--- Page 312/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Spot product prices, 1996 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 20.00 20.59 22.97 26.69 26.33 23.40 24.72 25.06 25.82 27.57 27.25 26.64 
Naphtha 19.07 18.91 19.46 22.21 21.03 19.30 20.91 21.48 23.17 25.19 24.90 24.81 
Jet kerosine 24.42 25.31 27.33 25.82 24.15 23.98 25.76 27.09 32.04 33.44 31.27 31.57 
Gasoil (fod) 22.79 24.69 25.38 25.47 23.39 22.35 24.37 25.40 30.03 32.01 29.75 29.92 
SRfuel 0.7%Sk 18.64 17.41 19.42 21.07 19.33 19.13 18.5 18.71 20.03 21.55 22.14 22.05 
Heavy fuel 1 .O%S 18.88 17.63 18.91 20.32 18.73 16.58 17.55 17.08 19.22 20.8 21.25 21.72 
Heavyfuel 3.0%S 16.23 15.23 16.57 17.24 15.41 13.30 13.99 14.96 17.69 19.12 18.15 18.41 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 97 .15Pb 20.89 21.46 24.37 28.03 28.20 25.02 26.24 26.12 26.41 27.56 27.68 27.06 
Naphtha 18.68 18.58 19.07 21.77 20.83 19.14 20.60 21.30 22.88 24.81 24.47 24.47 
Jet kerosine* 23.16 23.36 26.09 24.78 22.65 22.40 23.99 25.33 30.23 31.33 29.32 29.90 
Gasoil 23.96 23.74 25.10 26.03 23.64 22.41 23.88 25.22 30.11 31.53 29.92 29.63 
Heavyfuel I.O%S 19.16 18 07 19.21 20 71 19.03 17.40 18.17 16 96 19.36 21.14 21 72 22.15 
Heavy fuel 3.5%S 16.09 15.40 16.45 16.32 15.56 11.63 13.96 14.90 17.49 19.78 18.36 18.70 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 23.39 24.21 25.87 31.26 29.18 26.50 28.40 27.38 28.00 29.79 30.59 30.49 
Jet kerosine 24.98 25 15 26.57 27 79 24.41 23.40 24.64 27 19 30.80 31.80 31 08 31.83 
No 2 heating oil 23.54 24.97 26.11 26.27 23.52 21.71 23.55 25.43 28.60 30.55 29.58 30.48 
No 6fuel 0.3%S 23.68 21.08 22.13 22.71 19.39 18.39 19.51 20.32 21.49 23.36 23.63 24.46 
NO6fuel I.O%S 21.35 17 98 17.93 1941 17.78 16.84 17.70 17 26 18.48 20.97 20 85 21.81 
No 6fuel 3.0%S 15.67 14.56 14.91 15.83 15.11 14.35 14.91 14.96 16.42 19.26 18.99 17.33 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unlt 21.75 22.02 22.49 25.81 29.25 27.23 24.19 25.22 24.89 28.03 28.34 28.51 
No 2 heating oil 21 57 22.41 23.25 24.26 22.55 21 .I 9 22.77 24.67 27.57 29.32 28.40 28.40 
No6fuell.O%S 16.41 16.14 17.67 18.81 17.75 15.97 16.56 16.75 17.06 19.71 18.64 19.13 
Heavyfuel 3.0%S 14.25 1456 15.39 15 97 15.08 14.34 13.75 14 53 16.49 19.39 17 50 16.18 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 21.94 21.47 24.25 26.37 27.35 24.85 23.56 22.77 23.69 25.42 26.1 8 26.39 
Naphtha 17.50 16.70 18.36 20.40 19.51 18.75 19.54 20.01 21.04 22.46 23.34 25.02 
Jet kerosine 30.36 28 16 27.21 26 12 26.1 3 24.06 24.79 27 57 29.79 30.19 31 04 33.70 
Gasoil LP 25.28 26.45 25.85 25.56 26.49 24.29 24.38 25.39 27.74 29.99 30.77 32.63 
LSWR 16.78 15.69 15.49 16.45 18.46 17.67 16.66 17.13 18.25 19.70 19.27 22.32 
Heavy fuel 380cst 17.37 15.88 15.82 16.55 14.72 13.32 13.80 14.85 17.27 18.10 18.03 18.26 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. *FOB. 
f 92 unleaded until 13 September 1996. 
Appendix 5.llpage 4 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 313/964 ---
5 Product markets 
Spot product prices, 1997 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 26.38 25.27 25.21 23.97 25.21 23.84 23.60 26.91 25.56 24.58 23.26 21.61 
Naphtha 25.10 24.26 21.54 20.05 20.13 19.98 20.02 21.21 21.23 22.09 21.54 19.11 
Jet kerosine 31.38 26.11 24.40 23.71 24.33 22.92 22.97 23.78 23.47 25.43 25.55 23.33 
Gasoil 29.87 24.61 22.95 22.53 23.60 21.99 22.23 22.82 22.59 24.56 24.37 21.82 
SR fuel 0.7%S* 20.62 18.92 16.96 15.38 16.57 16.00 16.61 17.18 16.83 19.26 19.36 15.72 
Heavy fuel 1.O%S 18.70 16.90 16.23 15.07 15.33 16.03 16.14 16.21 16.36 18.50 19.57 15.99 
Heavy fuel 3.0%S 16.77 14.82 13.11 12.72 12.74 12.92 13.12 14.30 14.66 15.81 16.27 13.28 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 Unl 26.48 25.59 26.50 24.67 25.93 24.55 24.04 27.35 26.17 25.54 24.23 22.31 
Naphtha 24.69 23.78 21.15 19.62 19.65 19.82 19.93 20.90 20.81 21.64 21.26 18.78 
Jet kerosine* 29.40 24.63 22.50 22.20 22.56 21.14 21.27 22.20 21.76 23.95 25.09 22.28 
Gasoil 29.14 23.87 22.73 22.98 23.46 21.37 22.11 22.83 22.47 24.82 25.23 21.76 
Heavy fuel 1.O%S 19.20 17.46 16.86 15.71 15.99 16.69 16.58 16.77 16.90 18.71 20.01 16.35 
Heavy fuel 3.5%S 17.73 15.28 13.36 13.83 13.64 13.57 13.92 14.68 14.94 16.33 16.92 13.41 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 29.58 27.73 27.71 27.30 28.34 26.22 28.15 31.33 27.87 26.09 24.06 22.68 
Jet kerosine 30.88 27.26 24.63 24.15 24.38 23.12 23.78 24.62 24.00 25.30 24.84 22.62 
No 2 heating oil 29.42 25.51 23.17 23.60 23.62 22.12 22.43 22.85 22.41 24.22 23.92 21.69 
No 6 fuel 0.3%s 18.51 16.95 15.57 14.96 15.87 16.14 16.71 16.22 16.72 19.43 19.48 15.89 
No 6 fuel 1 O%S 18.51 16.95 15.57 14.96 15.87 16.14 16.71 16.22 16.72 19.43 19.48 15.89 
No 6fuel 3.0%S 15.94 15.15 13.59 14.01 14.50 14.37 14.78 15.39 15.87 17.41 17.77 13.76 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 29.50 27.22 27.45 26.22 27.28 25.45 26.72 29.10 26.15 24.65 23.19 22.36 
No 2 heating oil 27.58 24.20 22.17 22.07 22.76 21.35 21.70 22.35 22.00 23.81 23.06 20.53 
No 6 fuel 1 .O%S 17.23 15.78 14.55 15.08 15.32 16.16 15.87 16.36 16.49 18.30 18.64 14.62 
Heavy fuel 3.0%S 15.17 13.05 13.30 13.36 14.35 13.98 14.33 15.66 15.21 16.66 16.29 11.83 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 26.68 28.12 29.02 25.70 24.72 24.18 23.86 24.55 24.50 25.81 24.74 21.01 
Naphtha 24.65 24.72 23.78 21.53 21.59 20.81 21.42 20.99 20.58 22.10 22.22 19.01 
Jet kerosine 30.30 28.18 27.38 25.04 24.72 23.67 23.07 22.84 22.49 24.41 24.62 21.26 
Gasoil LP 28.40 25.42 27.02 26.80 25.20 22.92 21.37 22.44 23.18 23.81 23.89 20.85 
LSWR 21.78 19.44 17.18 15.70 15.29 14.96 16.60 15.52 15.58 16.51 16.81 15.48 
Heavy fuel 380cst 16.04 14.54 14.70 14.66 14.93 14.80 15.05 15.76 16.77 16.96 16.07 13.85 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. "FOB. 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 Appendix 5.lIpage 5

--- Page 314/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Spot product prices, 1998 
$/barrel Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
NW EUROPE CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 20.04 19.39 18.25 18.90 19.21 18.68 
Naphtha 17.38 16.93 15.54 14.49 15.26 13.32 
Jet kerosine 20.74 19.41 17.76 18.29 18.24 16.31 
Gasoil 19.32 18.50 17.40 18.19 17.29 15.76 
SRfuel 0.7%Sk 13.90 13.07 12.50 13.66 13.82 13.17 
Heavyfuel l.O%S 14.24 12.03 12.10 13.69 13.29 12.76 
Heavyfuel3.O%S 11.14 9.89 10.17 11.47 10.60 9.84 
MEDITERRANEAN CIF CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 20.41 19.87 18.57 19.22 19.54 18.86 
Naphtha 17.03 17.04 15.44 14.30 15.01 12.97 
Jet kerosine* 19.50 18.02 16.50 17.40 17.87 15.40 
Gasoil 18.88 18.45 17.69 18.24 17.42 15.32 
Heavyfuel 1.O%S 14.57 12 60 12.48 13 98 13.60 13.15 
Heavy fuel 3.5%S 11.41 9.73 10.39 11.82 11 .I 9 10.52 
NY HARBOR DEL CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 21.42 20.19 20.04 21.81 22.70 21.85 
Jet kerosine 21.19 2007 18.90 1908 18.74 17.93 
No 2 heating oil 19.81 18.85 17.92 18.29 17.59 16.20 
No 6 fuel 0.3%S 16.47 15.97 15.27 15.89 15.59 15.11 
No 6 fuel 1.O%S 13.72 11 89 11.76 14 08 13.58 13.29 
No6fuel3.0Y0S 11.41 10.22 9.87 12.19 11.56 10.94 
US GULF COAST FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 93 unl 20.89 20.33 19.71 22.07 22.37 21 .I 2 
No 2 heating oil 18.85 18.10 16.97 17.41 16.73 15.74 
No6fuel I.O%S 12.74 12.28 11.06 13.75 13.18 13.18 
Heavyfuel 3.0%S 9.77 10 19 7.99 11 50 10.83 10.43 
SINGAPORE FOB CARGOES 
Gasoline 95 unl 20.07 18.20 18.56 20.00 20.51 18.84 
Naphtha 17.19 15.44 15.05 16.17 15.94 14.14 
Jet kerosine 18.30 17 04 15.63 17 69 16.83 15.36 
Gasoil LP 17.88 17.46 16.16 17.66 16.19 15.27 
LSWR 12.04 10.10 10.15 11.60 11.75 10.12 
Heavy fuel 380cst 9.54 8.38 9.94 11.51 10.82 9.44 
Source: Petroleum Argus daily assessments. Averages calculated using a five day week. *FOB. 
Appendix 5.llpage 6 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 315/964 ---
Appendix 5.2 
Further reading 
Petroleurn Argus Oil Market Guides 
A series of occasional booklets providing detailed coverage of 
the main international crude and products markets, 
explaining how they operate, the methods of pricing, and the 
trading instruments used in each region. 
Argus Guide to European Products Markets 
1st edition, Aupst 1993 
Argus Guide to the International Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
Market 
1st edition, September 1993 
Argus Guide to the US Products Markets 
1st edition, February 1995 
Argus Guide to the Asia Pacific Products Markets 
1.st edition, October 1995 
Newsletters 
The former Weekly Petroleum Argus (WPA) has been 
expanded into two publications, each with a more clearly 
defined focus. 
Argus Global Markets (AGMj provides a topical and 
intelligent editorial on the market; news and analysis of 
latest developments; crude, product and futures market 
reviews; background history to set current prices in context; 
freight rates and oil market fundamentals. 
The new Weekly Petroleum Argus covers upstream and 
downstream investment; corporate strategy and profiles; 
Supplement 5 Jun 1998 Appendix 5.2lpage 1

--- Page 316/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
mergers and acquisitions; oil and gas finance and the 
geopolitics of energy. 
Other Argus newsletters include: 
Argus Fundamentals -a monthly round-up and analysis 
of oil supply, demand and stocks worldwide, including 
tanker movements. 
Argus FSU Energy -a weekly newsletter covering oil, 
gas and electricity in the former Soviet Union and eastern 
Europe. 
Argus LatAm Energy -a twice monthly newsletter 
covering oil, gas and electricity in Latin America. 
Argus LPG World -a twice monthly newsletter and 
senior management brief on the international LPG 
markets. 
Argus Gas Connections -a twice monthly newsletter 
covering the European gas and power generation 
markets. 
Appendix 5.2lpage 2 Supplement 5 Jun 1998

--- Page 317/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts 
Sally Clubley & David Long 
6.1 Introduction
6.2 What are futures and forward contracts?
6.2.1 Method of doing business
6.2.2 Degree of standardisation
6.2.3 Organisation of the market
6.2.4 Costs and security
6.2.5 Regulatory environment
6.3 The pricing of futures and forward contracts
6.3.1 Relationship to physical market
6.3.2 Term structure of prices
6.3.3 Arbitrage relationships
6.4 How are futures and forward contracts used?
6.4.1 Trading instruments
6.4.2 Trading motives
6.4.3 Hedging and basis risk
6.5 Conclusions
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 318/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 319/964 ---
6.1 Introduction 
Futures contracts remain the most important risk management instruments used in the oil market today – despite the growth of the swaps market ( see Chapter 8 ). Not only do they add an extra 
dimension to oil trading by allowing participants to buy or sell for future delivery, but they provide an essential transparent forward pricing framework that supports other derivative trad-ing instruments such as options and swaps ( see Chapter 10 ). The 
volume of oil traded on these markets is now more than 4 times total world demand. They are an integral part of the oil industry and the ﬁrst point of reference for traders. 
Forward contracts have now almost disappeared from many 
parts of the oil market, having been replaced by swaps and other instruments. But the forward Brent contract remains signiﬁcant, despite the continuing success of the Brent futures market. Else-where there are still a few forward contracts trading ( see Chapter 
7
). Even in Brent the volumes traded have declined sharply, but 
the fact that much of the internationally traded crude is priced, directly or indirectly, against dated Brent – the physical basis of the forward Brent market – means that some activity and much signiﬁcance remain in the market. 
One of the main advantages of forward markets over futures 
markets in the past was that the industry could introduce a new forward contract to meet hedging needs much more quickly than the futures markets, which were hampered by regulatory requirements. But it is now much easier to launch new futures contracts. In addition, this advantage is shared with the swaps market, which is also much more ﬂexible about the types of crude and product traded. 
And the reluctance of the new electronic 
trading platforms to get involved in physical contracts is likely to support the trend away from forward contracts ( see Chapter 
11). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.1/page 1

--- Page 320/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 321/964 ---
6.2 What are futures and 
forward contracts? 
Futures and forward contracts are both simple trading instru-ments involving the purchase or sale of a speciﬁed quantity and quality for delivery at a speciﬁc time in the future and under standardised terms and conditions at a ﬁxed price agreed now
. 
This enables companies to ﬁx their purchase or sale price ahead of time, either to reduce uncertainty (hedging) or as a means of speculating about the future price of oil. 
Unlike a spot contract, where the cargo and payment are 
exchanged almost immediately
, a forward or futures contract is 
not settled until the delivery date which may be months or even years ahead. Trading forward contracts often involves little or no initial outlay while futures contracts require only a small percentage payment. Both instruments can therefore provide a relatively cheap method of hedging or speculating. This forms a large part of their attraction. 
During the lifetime of a forward contract, however, buyer 
and seller are exposed to the risk of default since the prevailing market price at the time of delivery may be very different from the original contract price. If prices rise the buyer (who holds what is known as a long position) makes a proﬁt and the seller (who has a short position) makes a loss. If prices fall, the buyer loses and the seller proﬁts. Futures contracts reduce the risk of default with margins, which means that all proﬁts and losses are settled daily
. 
Although both forwards and futures apparently fulﬁl the 
same function, there are major differences between them in terms of the method of doing business, standardisation of the contracts, organisation of the market, costs and security and the regulatory environment and these all affect the way in which they are used and risks involved in trading them. 6.2.1 Method of doing business 
Futures markets are based on the principle of novation: buyer and seller agree a deal on the ﬂoor of the exchange, but when this is registered the clearing organisation steps into the middle of the deal. Both buyer and seller then have a contract with the clearing house and not with each other
. Because of the substitu-
tion of the clearing organisation, any deal concluded is effectively made with the market and any reversing deal can therefore be 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.2/page 1

--- Page 322/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
settled out immediately , regardless of the actual counterparty. 
The clearing house, which differs in form from exchange to exchange, acts as guarantor for the deal. All futures contracts have to be effected through a ﬂoor member of the relevant exchange, usually a futures broker and held by a clearing member. This member is the principal to the deal; the client (unless a clearing member itself) then has a corresponding deal with that member. 
Forward contracts are agreed between 2 principals. A cash 
broker may be used, but its role is as intermediary only. There is no formal organisation guaranteeing performance. Anyone with a forward contract is therefore relying on its counter-party to perform under the terms of the deal. A company which has bought a forward contract can effectively close it out by selling it, but as there is no clearing house this is normally to a different counterparty. A series of purchases and sales therefore results in the creation of a chain of buyers and sellers who, theoretically, are obliged to pass a physical cargo from one to another. In practice loops in these chains are identi -
ﬁed and an agreed cash settlement, known as a bookout, is agreed between the participants, but there can still be difﬁcul-ties as the physical nominations have to be passed from company to company
. 
6.2.2 Degree of standardisation 
Theoretically, forward contracts do not need to be standardised: each agreement can be adjusted to the requirements of the 2 parties to the deal. In practice, however
, they need to be stan-
dardised in order to fulﬁl a useful hedging or speculative func-tion. All the active forward contracts now traded, in both crude and products, are standard contracts, leaving only the price and the contract month to be negotiated between the 2 parties. Forward contracts are developed by the oil industry and contract terms are the industry norm for that crude or product. Forward contracts are for a normal traded quantity
, for example a 500,000 
barrel cargo of crude oil or a barge-load of gasoline. 
Futures contracts are standard by deﬁnition. All terms are 
laid down by the exchanges, after consultation with the industry
. 
In order to encourage speculative interest, exchange futures con-tracts are normally for small quantities, such as 1,000 barrels or 100 tonnes. 
As with a standard forward contract, only the deliv-
ery month and price can be negotiated. 
6.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 323/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
6.2.3 Organisation of the market 
Forward contracts are traded between market participants and there is no obligation to report the price of any deal done, although information is regularly exchanged between companies involved in the markets and reported by the various price report-ing systems. Prices are therefore generally known but not entirely transparent. The identity of the participants is similarly semi-transparent. 
All futures contracts are conducted by a trading method 
known as open outcry
, or its screen trading equivalent. Floor 
member buyers and sellers call out prices until agreement is reached. In most cases these ﬂoor members will be acting on behalf of industry or other clients, whose identity will not be revealed to the market at large – though the clearing house will be informed in some futures markets. The prices are immediately published on the screen information systems. They are therefore totally transparent, but the identity of the clients is hidden. 6.2.4 Costs and security 
Forward contracts have a very low cost prior to settlement. There is no contractual obligation for payment until settlement, though most companies are required to put up a letter of credit on enter-ing a deal. Payment would then be required either when the deal is booked-out or after physical delivery takes place, in accordance with the contract terms. If the transaction is initially done through a broker
, there would also be a commission to pay. 
Futures contracts have a higher ﬁnancial cost. In order to 
provide the guarantee of performance on all contracts, the clear-ing houses of the exchanges require payment of an initial margin, sometimes known as a deposit. The amount is ﬁxed by the clear-ing house and is increased at times of high price volatility, but it is normally around $1,500–2,500 per contract, or $1.50–2.50 per barrel. In addition, each contract is marked to market each night and the full difference payable daily
. This means that each con-
tract is effectively re-established each night at that day’s settle-ment price. 
For example, if one Brent contract of 1,000 barrels was 
bought at $22.00/barrel and the market settled at $22.50/barrel the buyer would receive 50 cents/barrel or $500 and the position would be revalued at $22.50/barrel. This process – known as “marking to market” – is repeated each day ( see below ). The pay-
ments are known as variation margins. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.2/page 3

--- Page 324/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Example: V ariation margin 
$/barrel 
Day 1 Brent bought at 22.00 
Market settles at 22.50 
Buyer receives 0.50 
Position revalued 22.50 
Day 2 Market settles at 22.30 
Buyer pays 0.20 
Position revalued 22.30 
Day 3 Market settles at 22.60 
Buyer receives 0.30 
Position revalued 22.60 
The clearing house monitors the positions of all its clearing members and, in most cases, the members’ 
customers. If neces-
sary, margin requirements can be increased for individual members or customers in order to maintain the guarantee. 
In addition to initial and variation margins, a negotiable 
commission is payable to the futures broker used and the exchange and clearing house take small fees: these would nor-mally total less than 1.5 cents/barrel. 6.2.5 Regulatory environment 
Futures markets are regulated by law in the various countries in which they operate. Each country has a speciﬁc body charged with monitoring the operation of the market and its members ensuring that the rules of the exchanges and the investor pro-tection laws are upheld. The 2 best known are the Commodity Futures T
rading Commission* (CFTC) in the US and the Finan-
cial Services Authority† (FSA) – formerly the Securities and 
Investments Board (SIB) – in the UK ( see Chapter 17 ). All new 
futures contracts have to be approved by the appropriate body and all brokers are monitored, including spot checks. The regu-lations are aimed at ensuring a fair market with all buyers and sellers, of whatever size, receiving equal treatment. The exchanges have comprehensive monitoring methods, including 
* www.cftc.gov 
†www.fsa.gov.uk 
6.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 325/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
video and sound tapes, to ensure that the trading ﬂoor is oper-ated within the rules. 
Forward contracts have no formal regulations attached and 
(unlike futures contracts) are speciﬁcally exempted from direct regulatory control in both the US and UK. However 
, there is 
an unwritten code of practice operated by the industry, some of which is supported by case law after a series of court cases dealing with certain aspects of the contracts. All forward con-tracts are subject to normal contract law under the jurisdiction speciﬁed in the contract. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.2/page 5

--- Page 326/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 327/964 ---
6.3 The pricing of futures and 
forward contracts 
Futures and forward contracts enable companies to establish a price for future delivery. Such prices are not only useful to the parties concerned but also to the market as a whole as they help create a price proﬁle stretching into the future. Forward prices are not predictions of the price at the speciﬁed time in the future – they are the price at which it is currently possible to transactbusiness for that time in the future and are inﬂuenced by a range of factors including the type of company engaged in trading forward. The forward curve can, however
, provide a useful indi-
cation of the current industry consensus price and enable com-panies to reallocate their surpluses and shortfalls accordingly. Before futures and forward contracts were introduced to the oil industry
, all transactions had to be carried out on the spot market 
which often made it difﬁcult to interpret price movements. 
Although the majority of futures and forward transactions 
are for only a few months ahead, trading can extend much further out. In the reﬁned products markets, there is usually enough liq-uidity to support trading over a period of at least a year ahead. And in the crude oil market, trading horizons regularly extend 3–5 years ahead. The most active futures contract, Nymex WTI, 
14 15 16 17 18 19 
1 5 9 $/barrel ¢01 ¢03 
¢02 ¢04 
1 31 7 2 1 2 52 9 3 33 7 4 1 4 5 4 9 5 35 7 6 1 6 56 9 7 3 
Future delivery month Dec Dec 
Dec Dec 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 6.1 WTI futures price curve, 17 September 1998 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.3/page 1

--- Page 328/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
can now be traded up to 7 years ahead and the forward price 
curve is used to determine the price of longer-term pricing instru -
ments such as swaps (see Fig. 6.1). 6.3.1 Relationship to physical market 
Prices for futures and forward contracts can be very different from those of the underlying physical commodity
. But as a 
forward or futures contract approaches expiry, the 2 must con-verge as, at the point of expiry, they become interchangeable: a buyer of a forward or futures contract will receive physical oil at the same time and under virtually the same conditions as a buyer on the physical market (see Fig. 6.2). 
There are occasional exceptions to this rule due to defects 
in the market delivery mechanism or a contract design which favours buyers over sellers or vice versa. But any contracts liable to regular squeezes, where either buyers or sellers can exert undue pressure on the other
, will not survive. The volumes traded 
on the futures market make any attempt to squeeze by buying or selling as much oil as is deliverable and attempting to extract a premium from the other side very difﬁcult. 
There are occasional squeezes, however, on both forwards 
and futures. It is often easier on a forward crude market, such as Brent where a limited number of physical cargoes are 
15 17 19 21 23 25 27 $/barrel 
Dec 94 May 95 Nov 95 May 96 Nov 96 May 97 Nov 97 Cash market Dec 97 futures 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Nymex 
Figure 6.2 Convergence of WTI futures and cash markets 
6.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 329/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
available each month, than on contracts where supply is virtu-ally unlimited. 
There are speciﬁc terms used to describe the differential in 
price between the nearby contract and the later months. If the nearby contract is at a premium to the later month the market is said to be in backwardation; if the nearby month is at a dis-count the market is in contango. Changes in these differentials can be due to various factors and can therefore be difﬁcult to interpret. But they are important as they inﬂuence the pricing of many of the derivative instruments such as swaps and options. 6.3.2 Term structure of prices 
Price spreads in the futures and forward product markets exhibit strong seasonal patterns reﬂecting changes in demand and in stock levels held by the industry (see Fig. 6.3). In agricultural commodities these differences normally reﬂect changes in supply when the product is harvested: in oil the changes are demand led. For example, gasoline demand reaches its peak in the summer months: this means the price structure will normally show a higher price in the summer contract months than the winter ones. That is, the market will be in contango from mid-winter to mid-summer and in backwardation thereafter
. This does not 
mean that the absolute spot price in the summer will be higher 
52 54 56 58 60 62 
lcents/gallon i l 
leaded 
Sep 97 Nov 97 Jan 98 Mar 98 May 98 Ju  98 Sep 98 Heat ng oiUn
Source: Nymex 
Figure 6.3 Forward product price curves (11 August 1998) 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.3/page 3

--- Page 330/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
than the absolute spot price in the winter , merely that the price 
curve will peak in the summer. The pattern for gasoil or heating oil is the reverse. 
There is a limit on the size of the contango possible in a 
market. If it is possible to buy the oil one month, pay for it, move it into storage, insure it and deliver it back to the market one month or more later at a proﬁt, traders will do it. This trading, known as cash and carry, will prevent the spread widening. The limit is not absolute because freight rates, storage charges and interest rates can all change, but it does represent the widest pos-sible spread, at least until storage is full. Example: Cash and carry arbitrage 
Buy March heating oil 74.00 cents/gall 
Sell April heating oil 77.00 cents/gall 
March Take delivery of heating oil futures at: 74.00 cents/gall 
Pay storage costs for 6 weeks: 2.30 cents/gall 
Interest costs, product losses etc. 0.25 cents/gall 
76.55 cents/gall 
April Deliver heating oil at: 77.00 cents/gall 
Net proﬁt/loss: +0.45 cents/gall 
In this case the trader would have made a proﬁt of 0.45 cents/gall,
less dealing costs. Storage costs, insurance and other time-
-2 0 2 4 6 8 10 
Jan Jun cents/gallon ion 1st � 2nd month 
Feb Mar Apr May Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 1996 1997 1998 Backwardat
Contango 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 6.4 Nymex heating oil, contango and backwardation 
6.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 331/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
sensitive costs will depend on the exact time of delivery in each month: in most futures markets the buyer chooses when to take delivery subject to agreement from the seller’s facility, so deliv-ery would be taken as late as possible in the ﬁrst month. In some instances it may not be possible to take delivery by in-tank trans-fer: in these cases it would be necessary to include transporta-tion to different storage tanks in the calculation. 
Backwardation does not have the same limits (see Fig. 6.4). 
Although it is theoretically possible to deliver oil onto the market and buy it back one month or more later
, the arbitrage procedure 
is less attractive this way round as oil has to be transported to the delivery location and may be of a different quality from the contract. In practice, backwardation is unlimited as companies will pay virtually any price when their need for supply becomes desperate. 6.3.3 Arbitrage relationships 
The spread between futures and forward markets and the under-lying physical markets is ultimately constrained by the oppor-tunities for arbitrage between the two. Arbitrage is the simultaneous buying of a product in one market and sale of the same product in a different market. If a proﬁt can be realised in this way
, traders will be moving the product or crude from one 
market and delivering it into the other. The limits on the spread are therefore determined, like the cost of cash and carry, by the costs involved. In practice, product is rarely moved between one futures market and another, but the fact that the spread is limited by the opportunities for arbitrage will attract speculative trading into the spread. 
Arbitrage in the commodity markets is not the same as in 
the ﬁnancial markets – it is not a risk-free way of locking in the price difference between 2 markets because the commodity has to be moved physically from one market to the other with all the operational and price risks involved in doing that. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.3/page 5

--- Page 332/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 333/964 ---
6.4 How are futures and forward 
contracts used? 
6.4.1 Trading instruments 
Futures and forward contracts can be used in many different ways depending on the motives and circumstances of the parties involved. The continued co-existence of the 2 forms of trading in the crude oil market not only provides a wide range of opportu-nities for the enterprising trader but offers companies involved in producing, reﬁning and marketing oil a broad choice of possi-ble instruments. These range from forward physical contracts, which are essentially extensions to the spot market, through forward paper contracts, which offer many of the beneﬁts of futures trading and some of their own, to futures contracts them-selves, with different attractions. In addition, futures contracts provide the means of combining 2 forms of trading through the use of the EFP 
(exchange for physical) delivery mechanism, 
which enables supply to be separated from price. Forward physical contracts The purpose of a forward physical contract is to establish a price for future delivery
. In some ways it can be regarded as an exten-
sion of the spot market since, like a spot contract, it can be difﬁ-cult to negotiate as it is tailored to the requirements of buyer and seller
. It can also be difﬁcult to distinguish between the 2 as many 
seemingly spot contracts in fact agree a delivery a month or more ahead, particularly in the crude oil market. Forward paper contracts These are the contracts normally meant when forward contracts are mentioned. They are the standardised forms of agreement for future delivery that are easily traded. Contract terms such as quality and the terms and locations for delivery are designed to be acceptable to the widest possible range of participants to improve liquidity
. 
Traders can therefore use the forward markets in the same 
way as futures contracts for hedging purposes since sales and purchases can often be closed out by taking the opposite position with a different counterparty
. This settlement is dependent on 
the identiﬁcation of a loop in a chain of sales and purchases. It is important to remember, however, that if such “bookouts” are 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.4/page 1

--- Page 334/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
not agreed the outstanding puchase and sale obligations remain 
in place until the physical nomination has been passed down the chain. This process can lead to difﬁculties. For example, the forward 15-day Brent contract speciﬁes that nominations be received by 5 pm London time. If a company receives a nomina
-
tion just before that time and is unable to pass it on with the required 15 days notice of the ﬁrst day of the loading date range, the nomination process stops and the company is left holding a physical cargo. The company would then have to nominate or even buy a different forward contract to meet its outstanding sale obligation and (possibly) dispose of the physical cargo – all of which may have very different values to the original forward con-tract ( see Chapters 7 and 16 ). 
Futures contracts The purpose of a futures contract is to provide a suitable hedging mechanism for the associated industry
, to provide security, to 
minimise the risk of manipulation and to create price trans-parency. They are traded by open outcry on a market ﬂoor (or its screen equivalent) and are monitored and guaranteed by a clear-ing house. The prices and quantities of all transactions are published. 
The vast majority (more than 99 per cent) of futures con-
tracts do not result in the physical delivery of oil. It is, however, important that the physical delivery terms are as close as possi-ble to those in the underlying physical market in order for price convergence to occur at the point of expiry
, when futures and 
physical trading should be substitutable. 
Some futures contracts, such as Brent on the IPE, are not 
designed for physical delivery
. Although physical delivery is pos-
sible, if both buyer and seller wish it, Brent contracts open at expiry are normally settled against an index price derived from the physical market. The contract was designed this way because of the difﬁculties in matching the physical delivery procedures with a realistic futures market. Exchange for physicals (EFPs) The EFP delivery mechanism is a means of using the futures market to price a physical transaction without getting involved in the exchange delivery process. Companies wishing to take physical delivery but requiring a different grade of oil, location or other change to the exchange rules, or who wish to choose their counterparty
, can agree a physical deal in the same way as 
6.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 335/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
normal, but instead of agreeing an outright price negotiate a dif-ferential to a speciﬁed futures contract. 
The physical deal is agreed and takes place in the normal 
way 
. Meanwhile, both parties have to establish a futures posi-
tion: the buyer must, at some point, buy the agreed futures con-tracts and the seller sell the same quantity of the same contract. The two futures contracts are settled out at an agreed price by notifying the exchange that an EFP 
is being registered. The price 
does not matter as the same price is used as the basis for the invoice on the physical deal ( see Chapter 8 ). 
The registration of the EFP can create a futures position if 
the buyer has not yet bought or the seller sold. In this case, the futures contracts are treated just like any other and are subject to initial and variation margins. 
EFPs are widely used in the oil markets. They have enabled 
term contracts, where a buyer agrees to buy a series of cargoes from a supplier over a period of time, to reappear after a period of disuse because they allow each party to maintain control over pricing while guaranteeing physical supply or outlets. 6.4.2 Trading motives 
There are 3 main uses for futures and forward markets: hedging, speculation and arbitrage. The aim of hedging is to protect a physical position from a major adverse price movement. Specu-lators aim to make money by correctly predicting the price move-ment in a market. Arbitrageurs take advantage of temporary price distortions in the market. In practice, however
, it is often 
difﬁcult to distinguish between the different motives. The choice of a hedging instrument, for example, will include a calculation of any arbitrage value. In some countries, however, it can affect the tax and accounting position of the trade. Hedging Companies involved in the physical oil market can protect them-selves against adverse price movements by taking an opposite position on the futures or forward market to that held on the physical market. In this way any loss in the physical market should be offset by a corresponding gain on the futures or forward market. 
A hedge will rarely, if ever, be perfect, but if chosen 
correctly will provide some insurance. 
Hedging can be used for various purposes. It can, for 
example, protect a buyer of oil against a fall in price while oil is in transit. 
An oil trader who has bought a cargo of physical oil 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.4/page 3

--- Page 336/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
would sell an equivalent volume of oil futures or forward con -
tracts. This is known as a short hedge because the trader takes a short futures position. As soon as the physical cargo is sold, the hedge is lifted, i.e. the futures contracts are bought back. 
Effective hedging depends on the assumption that prices in 
the physical and forward or futures markets move together. Ideally the differential between the two, the basis, would remain constant but in practice this rarely happens either because the product or crude being hedged is not identical in every respect to the futures or forward contract being used, or because the degree of backwardation or contango in the forward or futures market changes. Example: Short hedge Company A buys a 500,000 barrel cargo of crude oil from a sup-plier for $22/barrel. The current futures price is $22.20/barrel. It decides to sell futures as a hedge. 
A few days later it sells the 
physical cargo for $21.50/barrel and buys back its futures con-tracts, which are now trading at $21.60/barrel. 
Physical Market $/bl Futures Market $/bl 
Day 1 Cargo bought at: $22.00 
Futures sold at $22.20 
Day 6 Cargo sold at: $21.50 
Futures bought at $21.60 
Loss -$0.50 Proﬁt +$0.60 
In this case the hedger has taken a larger proﬁt on the futures than the loss made on the physical market. This results from a change in the basis, which is the differential between the futures market and the product actually being traded. Example: Long hedge In the same way, a company which is short of oil in the physical market will use a long hedge, i.e. will buy futures, to protect itself against a rise in price. For example, a gasoil distributor might agree to sell oil to a customer at a ﬁxed price for some months ahead. In order to protect itself against a rise in price it will buy futures. When the company buys the oil to fulﬁl the order
, the 
hedge will be lifted. 
6.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 337/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
Physical Market $/tonne Futures Market $/tonne 
Month 1 Oil sold at: $223 
Futures bought at $222 
Month 2 Oil bought at: $230 
Futures sold at $228 
Loss -$7 Proﬁt +$6 
In this case the futures proﬁt did not quite match the loss on the physical market: again this was due to a change in the basis. Speculation Speculation is the opposite of hedging. Speculators take a posi-tion on the market purely in order to make a proﬁt. Futures and forwards markets are ideally suited to this activity as there are none of the operational problems which can arise if speculation is carried out with physical cargoes of oil. 
Speculators are regarded as undesirable by some in the 
market, but they are a necessary part of any futures market as they take on the risk which hedgers are trying to lay off. Many speculators, particularly the local ﬂoor traders, hold onto their positions for a very short time and are in and out of the market several times each day
, increasing liquidity and making it easier 
for hedgers to trade when they want to. 
Hedge funds and other large investment funds are also 
major users of the the futures markets. They normally trade on a technical basis, using price charts and theories of price move-ment to determine when and how much to buy and sell. They can cause temporary price anomalies but these are usually very short-lived as industry participants are quick to take advantage of any movement that appears illogical in the light of physical market conditions. Example: Speculating on a price rise A strike at an off-shore oil platform interrupts production in the North Sea. 
As a result, prices are expected to rise and a specu-
lator buys IPE Brent futures in the hope of making a proﬁt. Several days later
, the strike is settled and production is restored 
so the speculator closes out his position before prices can fall back again. Since there is no physical transaction involved the 2 trades must be classed as purely speculative. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.4/page 5

--- Page 338/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Physical Market $/bl Futures Market $/bl 
Day 1 No transaction Futures bought at $23.20 
Day 5 No transaction Futures sold at $25.10 
Proﬁt +$1.90 
Arbitrage and spreads 
Arbitrage, the simultaneous buying of a product or crude in one market and sale in another, is one of the means by which prices in different markets are kept in line. When price relationships move out of line, however brieﬂy, arbitrageurs will come into the market, buying the under-priced one and selling the over-priced, thus helping to bring price back into line. In many cases the con
-
tract speciﬁcations are not exactly the same: it is not possible for example to take delivery from the Nymex heating oil contract and deliver it onto the IPE. But the limits to the differential between the 2 are still governed by the costs of transport, insurance etc. across the 
Atlantic. 
Example: Heating oil arbitrage August gasoil on the IPE and heating oil on the Nymex are trading at the same price. Many traders expect Nymex heating oil to move to a premium over the IPE because of good demand in the US and plentiful stocks in Europe. They therefore buy Nymex heating oil contracts and sell IPE gasoil, subsequently reversing the process when the spread has widened. 
IPE gasoil contracts are 100 tonnes and Nymex heating oil 
contracts are 1,000 gallons. It is therefore necessary to trade 3 
Nymex heating oil contracts for every 4 IPE gasoil contracts. Fur-
thermore, IPE gasoil prices are quoted in $/tonne while Nymex heating oil prices are quoted in cents/gallon. In order to convert cents/gallon into $/tonne the Nymex heating oil price is multi-plied by 3.13 because there are 313 gallons of heating oil in a tonne assuming an average speciﬁc gravity for gasoil of 0.845 kg/litre. Both contracts have a maximum speciﬁc gravity but a range is deliverable so traders tend to use different factors. The important thing is to use the same factor to put on and take off the spread. 
6.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 339/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
Nymex Price Price IPE Price Price 
heating oil cts/gall $/tonne gasoil $/tonne differential 
21 June Buy 3 at: 75.27 235.60 Sell 4 at: 236.00 -0.40 
22 July Sell 3 at: 75.08 235.00 Buy 4 at: 230.00 +5.00 
Loss -0.19 -0.60 Proﬁt +6.00 + 4.60 
The total proﬁt in this case is $4.60/tonne and is determined by the change in the differential so the direction of the market move is irrelevant. Other spreads traded include inter-month spreads, where the price in one month is out of line with that in another
. These 
spreads are limited by the cash and carry cost, as described earlier, and, in some cases, by the costs of “lending” oil to the market. 
Spreads between different futures or forward markets are 
also traded actively
. For example the differential between oil 
products and crude oil can be traded. The best example of this is the crack spread on the Nymex where the spread between heating oil, gasoline and crude is traded as if it were a paper reﬁnery. Traders will either buy gasoline and heating oil and sell crude or vice versa. In the physical market when this spread narrows reﬁners will reduce capacity throughput and traders are seeking to mimic this on the futures market. It is not a perfect match because there are only 2 product futures contracts avail-able while a reﬁnery produces many more, but it is sufﬁciently close to provide trading opportunities. Example: Crack spread arbitrage A trader notes that the Nymex crack spread in August is trading at $5.00/barrel, narrower than normal. Crack spreads involve an equivalent number of crude and product contracts, usually 2 gasoline and 1 heating oil against 3 crude oil: a 3 :2:1 crack 
spread of $5.00 means that the products are trading at a $5.00 premium to crude oil. When the spread widens to $6.50 the trader decides to take his proﬁt. There are 42 US gallons in a barrel of oil. 
2 gasoline contracts bought at 76.00 cts/gall ($31.92/bl) 
1 heating oil contract bought at 72.64 cts/gall ($30.51/bl) 
3 crude oil contracts sold at $26.45/bl 
Differential = (2 ¥ 31.92 + 30.51)/3 -26.45 = $5.00/bl 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.4/page 7

--- Page 340/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
When the spread increases the reverse transaction is done. 
2 gasoline contracts sold at 84.00 cts/gall ($35.28/bl) 1 heating oil contract sold at 78.43 cts/gall ($32.94/bl) 3 crude oil contracts bought at $28.00/bl 
Differential = (2 ¥ 35.28 + 32.94)/3 -28.00 = $6.50/bl 
As with any spread, the overall direction of the market does not matter in determining proﬁtability
, it is only the differential 
between the contracts traded which matters. 6.4.3 Hedging and basis risk 
Basis risk is an essential consideration in any hedging pro-gramme. The basis is the difference in price between the product or crude to be hedged and the hedging instrument being used. The closer the relationship between the two the more effective the hedging will be. 
As there are very few futures contracts 
traded almost everyone using them is exposed to some basis risk. 
Before starting any hedging programme it is necessary to 
establish the historical basis relationship by comparing prices over as long a period as possible. In many cases, there is a clearly deﬁned seasonal change in the relationship and provided this is taken into account hedging can be effective (see Fig. 6.5). Or the relationship can be affected by other factors some of which may 
-10 0 10 20 30 40 50 
l $/tonne i
i
i il
i il
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Ju Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jet Keros ne CIF NWE, 1996 Jet Keros ne CIF NWE, 1997 Heat ng O , FOB Barges, 1996 Heat ng O , FOB Barges, 1997 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE 
Figure 6.5 Basis risk against the IPE gasoil contract 
6.4/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 341/964 ---
6 Futures and forward contracts
be foreseeable. But there will be some products and crudes for which no satisfactory relationship can be identiﬁed. In these cases it would be worth looking at other futures, swaps or forward contracts to see if a more effective instrument can be found. 
It was largely the erratic nature of the basis between jet fuel 
and fuel oil and the futures and forward instruments available which led to the rapid growth of swaps markets in these 2 prod-ucts in the early part of the 1990s. Consumers of the 2 products had not been able to establish a predictable basis relationship and therefore preferred to hedge with a direct swap contract. 
In many cases, however, a satisfactory basis can be estab-
lished and this should be taken into account each time a hedging decision is made. For example, if a gasoil trader has established that the local market in which he is active normally trades at a premium of between $5 and $9 to the futures market, he can use this information to improve his hedging efﬁciency by hedging when the basis move is likely to be attractive. 
Thus, if the local market is trading at a $5 premium to the 
IPE, a trader considering buying gasoil futures to hedge a short physical position could improve his hedging efﬁciency because the basis is more likely to widen than narrow
. Since the trader is con-
cerned about the risk of falling prices, he wants the basis to be at its narrowest. If the historical basis relationship holds, futures prices could potentially fall by $4 more than the local physical market. On the other hand, if the premium is already $9 it is not a good time to hedge since the basis is more likely to narrow and prices on the futures market could rise by $4 relative to the local physical market. 
Impact on hedge efﬁciency Basis widens Basis narrows 
Long hedge (short physical) Worse Better 
Short hedge (long physical) Better Worse 
If the trader is selling futures to hedge a long physical position rather than buying and therefore considering a long hedge, the reverse applies: a $5 premium would be a poor hedging opportu-nity, but a $9 premium would be unattractive. 
In a major price move, basis relationships can become 
insigniﬁcant since any protection is better than none at all. But in a quieter market changes in the basis can outweigh any beneﬁts to be obtained from hedging. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.4/page 9

--- Page 342/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 343/964 ---
6.5 Conclusions 
Futures and forward contracts have different strengths and weaknesses when used for either hedging or speculation. These can be summarised as follows: 
Forwards Futures 
Contract Size Developed by industry Bulk with operational 
tolerances Fixed by exchange Small and ﬁxed 
Structure Chains Novation 
Settlement Costs Regulation Security Users Offsets/bookouts Letters of credit, brokerage Informal Counterparty risk (same 
as physical market) 
T
rade, ﬁnancial By Clearing House 
Margins, fees, brokerage 
Formal 
Clearing House 
guarantees 
T
rade, ﬁnancial 
institutions institutions, locals 
Proﬁt/loss On closure/delivery Daily marking to 
market 
The choice of futures or forwards and of which particular contract will depend on the circumstances. The most important consider-ation is that of basis risk: how closely does the product or crude to be hedged match the hedging instrument. The better the match, the better the hedge. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 6.5/page 1

--- Page 344/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 345/964 ---
7Forward paper markets 
David Long 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Structure and organisation 
7.2.1 Method of operation 
7.2.2 Market organisation 
7.2.3 Market structure 
7.2.4 Sources of price information 
7.3 Europe 
7.3.1 15-day Brent 
7.3.2 Naphtha 
7.3.3 Gasoil 
7.3.4 Fuel oil 
7.3.5 Propane 
7.4 United States 
7.4.1 Crude oil 
7.4.2 Refined products 
7.5 Arab Gulf and Far East 
7.5.1 Dubai crude 
7.5.2 Naphtha 
7.6 Future developments 
Appendix 
7.1 Russian gasoil 
7.2 Littlebrook fuel oil 
7.3 Flexi-propane 
7.4 European O/S naphtha 
7.5 Fuel oil domestique 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 346/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 347/964 ---
7.1 Introduction 
Forward "paper" contracts have played an important role in the 
development of the oil market. By providing a standardised form of 
agreement that could be easily traded in much the same way as a 
futures contract, forward paper markets such as 15-day Brent 
made a significant contribution to the rapid growth in trading 
activity during the 1980s and the consequent improvements in 
liquidity and price transparency. Without the flexibility offered by 
informal forward paper contracts, the speed of development of the 
oil market might have been much slower since new futures 
contracts take time to develop and have not always been successful. 
But forward markets also have their limitations since they 
ultimately involve physical deliveiy -which can make it difficult 
or costly to close out positions -and the industry now prefers to 
use swaps wherever possible. 
To begin with, forward and futures contracts were seen as 
competing instruments and many expected that futures markets 
would eventually replace the forward paper markets, as has often 
happened in other commodity markets. However, experience has 
shown that forward paper contracts can still play a key role in the 
oil market, often in parallel with successful futures contracts such 
as Brent and WTI. In the case of oil, forward markets appear to 
play a complementary role to the futures markets since they 
provide some benefits that are not available from futures contracts. 
First, they can be traded around the clock and therefore 
provide a trading instrument that can be used outside normal 
futures exchange hours -this proved invaluable at the start of the 
Gulf War. Secondly, they enable companies to trade much larger 
quantities of oil in a single transaction. Thirdly, they enable 
participants to choose their trading partners. And, fourthly, they 
involve physical delivery which some companies prefer either for 
practical or fiscal reasons. 
Compared with the markets for new trading instruments such 
as swaps or' over-the-counter. (OTC) options which are growing 
rapidly, forward paper markets have reached a more mature phase 
of development and a number of contracts have recently ceased 
trading. Nevertheless, they remain an important and potentially 
innovative sector of the oil market capable of generating new 
contracts if required, especially if swaps are subjected to a more 
restrictive regulatory regime than applies at present (see Chapter 
17). Although the turnover of the forward paper markets is now 
much smaller than that of the futures markets, forward paper 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.llpage 1

--- Page 348/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Table 7.1 Forward paper markets, 1997 
Europe United States Arab Gulf and Far 
East 
15-day Brent WTI and other Dubai crude 
pipeline crudes 
Colonial Pipeline O/S naphtha 
Boston Bingo 
contracts still play a key role in areas where they retain a 
comparative advantage. 
At present, there are only five successful oil futures contracts 
in operation on the three energy exchanges (see Chapter 81, but 
there are still more forward paper contracts in active use around 
the world -although forward trading volumes are now much 
lower and time horizons are much nearer than they used to be. In 
practice, the strongest competition has come not from the futures 
market, but from swaps which are able to mimic many of the 
essential characteristics of a forward paper contract without posing 
the problems sometimes associated with physical delivery. As a 
result, most of the recent innovations such as Brent "contracts for 
differences" (CFDs) and the so-called "Paper" Tapis market have 
been based on swaps rather than a conventional forward paper 
contract. Also a number of previously active forward paper 
markets", such as Russian gasoil, Littlebrook fuel oil, and European 
open-spec naphtha have now been replaced by swaps (see also 
Chapter 10). However, forward paper trading remains an 
important part of the oil market in the North Sea, the United 
States and the Far East and still plays a significant role in 
establishing prices for forward delivery. 
Further information about these now defunct forward paper 
contracts can be found in the Appendices to this chapter. 
7.lipage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 349/964 ---
7.2 Structure and organisation 
Although forward paper markets fulfd many of the same functions 
as futures markets they differ in terms of their method of 
operation, structure and organisation. Forward paper contracts are 
not traded on a formal futures exchange (which is subject to 
external regulation) but are traded informally between principals 
who must regulate themselves. In the US, forward paper contracts 
are specifically excluded from regulation under the Commodity 
Exchange Act (CEA) by the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC). But in the UK, participants are expected to 
regulate themselves according to the provisions of the Financial 
Services Act (FSA) 1986 and markets are subject to the overall 
supervision of of the Financial Services Authority (FSA) -formerly 
the Securities and Investments Board (SIB). 
In addition, there is no clearing house to manage and 
guarantee the matching and delivery of contracts so the 
participants must also do this for themselves. Nor is there any 
obligation to publish the details of any deal that is done so there is 
less price transparency than on a futures market. As a result, 
forward paper markets tend to attract a narrower set of 
participants than futures markets since using them involves risks 
and requires dedicated manpower to maintain contact with the 
market. Generally speaking these are the larger oil companies and 
traders who are active in the physical oil market and the Wall 
Street investment banks who also play the role of market maker. 
7.2.1 Method of operation 
Business on the forward paper markets is usually conducted over 
the telephone. Participants either trade directly between each other 
or' through specialist brokers who provide a useful service by 
quoting bid-ask levels for forward contxacts and enabling 
participants to test the market without revealing their identity. 
However, forward deals cannot be concluded anonymously (as they 
can on the futures market) since the identity of the counterpart will 
affect the terms of the deal if credit or delivery risks arise. In such 
cases, credit guarantees such as a letter of credit will be required 
(see Chapter 13). Once the terms of the deal have been agreed 
between the counterparts, confirmation will be sent by telex or fax. 
Forward paper contracts are based on physical delivery of the 
underlying commodity during an agreed time period in the future, 
either a full calendar month or a specified part of it. Although they 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.2lpage 1

--- Page 350/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
specify standard quantities and qualities, and are subject to a 
mutually agreed set of terms and conditions in order to provide a 
flexible trading instrument, they can only be discharged by 
nominating a suitable physical cargo against the paper contract. 
Nominations are usually at the seller's discretion", subject to a 
minimum notice period, and the buyer therefore has no control over 
the precise date on which the contract will be liquidated. As a 
result, forward paper positions remain open until the seller 
nominates a particular cargo of physical oil to meet his contractual 
obligations. At this point the buyer must either decide to accept 
physical delivery, or pass on the nomination to a third party 
against another forward sale, thus closing out his position. This 
rather haphazard process creates what is known as a "daisy chain" 
of paper contracts that link the original supplier of the physical 
cargo to the ultimate purchaser. In active forward markets daisy 
chains can include hundreds of links, many of which involve the 
same companies. 
In order to reduce the complexity and uncertainty of the 
market clearing process, participants can agree in advance to 
identify and "book out" circles of contracts that start and end with 
the same party (see Chapter 12). In this case the parties involved 
agree to pay each other the difference between the purchase and 
sale price, thus reducing the cash flow associated with the 
transactions. However, booking out does not remove the obligation 
to make physical nominations and the process only works as long as 
no one defaults on the agreement when the contracts are actually 
discharged. 
7.2.2 Market organisation 
Since forward markets are organised by the participants and not by 
an exchange or clearing house, forward contracts involve a number 
of delivery risks for the parties concerned that do not arise in the 
case of futures contracts. First, it is not always possible to close out 
a position even if a company has both bought and sold a paper 
contract. If, for example, the notice period for nominations has 
expired the buyer cannot pass on his cargo to another company 
which leaves him with not only an unwanted physical cargo, but 
also the obligation to supply another physical cargo with suitable 
delivery dates. 
%Inthe case of the Dubai paper market, buyers are entitled to 
nominate their preferred loading date range subject to acceptance by the 
terminal operators (see 7.5.1). 
7.2ipage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 351/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
In the 15-day Brent market, for example, sellers are obliged to 
give 15 working days' notice of the first day of the loading date 
range for the physical cargo and the working day is deemed to end 
at 5pm London time. Nominations received just before or at 5pm on 
the 16th day before loading cannot therefore be passed on and 
unscrupulous traders have been known to disconnect telephones 
and telex machines to avoid being "five o'clocked". 
Secondly, forward contracts typically involve a loading 
tolerance of plus or minus 5 or even 10 per cent that can be 
exercised at the seller's discretion. Although this is meant to 
provide for operational flexibility, it is often used by paper sellers to 
maximise their profits or minimise their losses. Companies can 
therefore never be certain of the exact size of their position since 
the seller may nominate minimum or maximum volumes against 
the paper contract. In the case of the European "open-spec" 
naphtha market the range used to be from 17 to 25,000 tonnes, a 
range of 8,000 tonnes or nearly 40 per cent of the average cargo 
volume. 
Thirdly, in forward markets which trade cargoes for CIF 
delivery, it is possible to pass nominations from one delivery month 
to the next thus delaying the discharge of vessels and incurring 
demurrage charges that get passed down the chain of paper 
contracts. As a result, buyers can find that they are facing hidden 
costs and may need to resort to legal action to recover them from 
the companies that are actually responsible. In the case of the 
"open-spec" naphtha market, contracts now specify that demurrage 
charges will be shared between all the companies involved in a 
chain, not just the one which ends up taking delivery. 
7.2.3 Market structure 
The more active forward paper markets offer opportunities for 
spread trading as well as outright deals. In order to encourage 
liquidity both between contract months and between similar 
contracts, such as 15-day Brent and paper Dubai, companies can 
agree to link pairs of forward contracts in order to create a "spread' 
trade. Thus a company that wants to roll over its short position 
from October to November can agree to buy October and sell 
November with the same counterpart. Similarly, a company that 
wants to convert a short Dubai position to a short Brent position 
can agree to buy Dubai and sell Brent in the same way. Spread 
trades can be used both to hedge and speculate and now constitute 
the majority of the total trading volume in the larger forward paper 
markets. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.2lpage 3

--- Page 352/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
100% 
80% 
1Q86 1Q87 1Q88 1Q89 1Q90 1Q91 1Q92 1Q93 1Q94 1Q95 1Q96 1Q97 1Q98 
ource: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 7.I Share of outright deals in 15-day Brent market 
The growth of spread trading at the expense of outright deals 
has led to accusations that prices in the forward paper markets are 
the result of a circular process that bears little relation to the 
supply-demand fundamentals. In the words of one market 
commentator, "the tail wags the dog". Such accusations, however, 
do not take into account the practicalities of trading on the forward 
paper markets and therefore misunderstand the purpose of spread 
trading. Between 1987 and 1994 the proportion of outright deals 
reported by Petroleum Argus in the 15-day Brent market declined 
from 75 per cent to 20 per cent. The downward trend halted in 1994 
and the proportion of outright deals briefly recovered to over 30 per 
cent at the end of 1995, but has since stabilised at around 20 per 
cent. As a result, the number of outright deals reported now 
averages 2-3 per day compared with over 20 in the late 1980s (see 
Fig. 7.1). Outright deals are typically concentrated in the second 
nearby delivery month, which is also the most liquid. 
Given the risks associated with trading forward paper 
contracts it is not surprising that companies should prefer to 
engage in spread trading wherever possible since this, at least, 
ensures that the paper position can be liquidated without difficulty. 
Outright deals are therefore largely confined to the month with the 
greatest liquidity in order to minimise the delivery risks. The same 
argument can also be applied to the paper Dubai market which, 
since the Gulf crisis in 1990, has traded almost exclusively as a 
spread market against 15-day Brent. 
7.2ipage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 353/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
7.2.4 Sources of price information 
Price assessments for most forward paper markets are widely 
available from specialist price reporting organisations such as 
Petroleurn Argus, Platt’s and Reicters. In addition, there are 
specialist brokers and market makers in each market who are 
usually willing to quote a bid/ask range for the most active forward 
paper contracts. 
Since there is no formal obligation for participants to report 
the prices of deals done, the accuracy of any published price 
assessment ultimately depends on the skill and thoroughness of 
individual price reporters and their parent organisations. However, 
since it is also in the participants' interests to have reasonably 
accurate assessments published, most participants are prepared to 
co-operate with the price reporting organisations in order to ensure 
that sensible numbers are printed. 
Of course, each participant will attempt to keep part of their 
activities "private and confidential" so it is never possible to 
guarantee that a given assessment is perfectly accurate. But the 
fact that so many other trading activities now make use of 
published price assessments in order to calculate weekly or 
monthly averages for pricing formulas means that the industry 
keeps a close eye on the accuracy of assessments and is quick to 
complain if the numbers seem out of line (see Chapter 3). In the 
case of 15-day Brent, published price assessments are also used to 
establish the IPE's Brent price index, which is used to settle Brent 
futures contracts (see Chapter 8). 
Screen quotes are available for the most active markets from 
on-line specialists such as Reuters, Bridge Tclerate, and Bloomberg. 
These typically include the main forward crude markets: Brent, 
Dubai and WTI and are updated frequently during the day as 
prices change. But the primary source of pricing information for the 
forward crude markets remains the daily price assessments 
published by price reporting organisations such as Petroleum, 
Argus, Platt’s, Loizdoii Oil Report (LORI and RIM. Both Plntt’s and 
Argus are widely used in pricing formulas and as the basis for swap 
contracts and the UK OTO has agreed that their North Sea price 
assessments can be used for tax purposes. In addition, Petroleum 
Argus publishes regular daily price assessments for the remaining 
forward product markets in the US and the Far East. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.2lpage 5

--- Page 354/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 355/964 ---
7.3 Europe 
Forward paper markets have traditionally been very important in 
north-west Europe and mere originally preferred to futures 
markets by many participants. The largest forward paper market, 
the 15-day Brent market: is based on a blend of North Sea crudes 
and London is the most important trading centre. In addition, there 
used to be active forward paper markets for refined products such 
as naphtha, gasoil and fuel oil -but all the liquidity has now 
moved into swaps (see Chapter 10). Although the London 
International Petroleum Exchange (IPE j has tried to establish 
futures contracts for most of these grades, only the IPE Brent and 
gasoil contracts have actually succeeded and over-the-counter 
(OTC) forward and swaps markets remain an effective alternative 
to formal futures markets. There were never any forward paper 
contracts based on Mediterranean delivery, but there are now a 
number of active swaps markets for both crude and products. 
Table 7.2Liquidity in European forward paper markets, 1997 
Market Contract Daily Estimated Physical 
size deals turnover base 
15-day Brent 600,000 bls 25-30 13mn bld 0.7mn bld 
Futures markets 
TPE Brent 1,000 bls 40,719 40.7mn bld 
IPE gnsoil 100 1 15,935 15.9mn b/d 
7.3.1 15-day Brent 
Contract 
The 15-day Brent market trades paper- cargoes of Brent Blend 
crude oil for delivery fob Sullom Voe during any future calendar 
month. The current Brent cargo size is 500,000 bls, which is subject 
to an operational tolerance of 2 5 per cent. Smaller quantities can 
be traded on the Brent "partials" market, a paper market operated 
by the larger market makers dealing in part-cargo quantities that 
can be converted into full cargoes if required. The forward contract 
is based on Shell's General Terms and Conditions (see Chapter 16). 
There are no alternative delivery options. Prices are negotiated in 
US dollars per barrel. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.3lpage 1

--- Page 356/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Brent Blend is a light low sulphur crude oil very similar in 
quality to West Texas Intermediate. Since July 1990 it has been 
formed from a combination of the output from both the Brent and 
Ninian systems, which together produced an average of 670,000 bid 
in 1997. It is the largest of the North Sea export streams, which, 
together with its diverse ownership structure makes it a suitable 
basis for a forward paper market. More than 30 companies have an 
equity share in the production of Brent Blend, of which the three 
largest are Exxon, Shell and BP who together own just over two- 
thirds of the total output. On average, there are between 40 and 50 
cargoes of Brent available each month which could be nominated 
against paper contracts. 
Terminology 
The market is known as the "15-day" Brent market because the 
contract specifies that each seller must give his buyer at least 15 
days' notice of the first day of the three day loading date range for 
the physical cargo that is to be nominated against the paper 
contract. Cargoes loading with less than 15 days' notice cannot be 
nominated against a paper contract and are traded as spot or 
"dated" cargoes. 
The loading programme for Brent Blend is published on the 
15th of the month preceding delivery, which means that cargoes 
can be nominated against paper contracts during the last half of 
the month preceding the delivery month and the first half of the 
delivery month. Since the loading date range specified in the 
nomination against a forward paper contract for a particular 
delivery month must not spill over into the following month, 15-day 
Brent trading for the next forward month effectively ceases 
between the 10th and the 12th of the month preceding delivery and 
the market "rolls over" to the next nearby month at this date. 
Liquidity 
The 15-day Brent market is the most liquid of the forward paper 
markets. In 1997 Petroleum Argus reported nearly 3200 deals, an 
average ofjust under 13 per day, but industry sources estimate the 
true size of the market to be at least two times this volume, 
suggesting a total turnover of around 13 million b/d, or about an 
eighth of the volume of the Nymex Light Sweet Crude contract. 
Liquidity is typically concentrated in the second nearby delivery 
month, which is roughly equivalent to the first nearby Nymex light 
sweet crude futures contract month. Paper contracts are t.raded up 
to one year ahead and there is sufficient liquidity for regular 
7.3ipage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 357/964 ---
I 
7 Forward paper markets 
2500 T 
2000 
-rn 
1500U
-0 
z Q
5 1000 z 
500 
0 
1Q86 1Q87 1Q88 1Q89 1090 1Q91 1Q92 1Q93 1094 1Q95 1Q96 1Q97 1Q9E 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 7.2 Reported trading volumes in, 15-day Brent marhet 
assessments to be published for delivery periods four to five months 
ahead. 
Brent trading volumes peaked in early 1988, when Argus 
reported an average of over 30 deals per day, before falling in the 
late 1980s to an average of just under 20 per day as uncertainty 
over the legal status of the market increased as a result of the 
Transnor case (see Fig. 7.2). Volumes subsequently recovered close 
to their earlier levels, partly as a result of the US CFTC ruling in 
September 1990, which confirmed that the 15-day Brent market 
was an international forward market and not subject to US 
government regulation, and partly as a result of the price volatility 
that followed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Reported trading 
volumes then remained fairly constant at an average of nearly 25 
per day until the middle of 1992 when they fell to about 15 per day. 
Over the past few years reported trading volumes have averaged 
around 13 deals a day. The sharp reduction in 15-day Brent 
volumes from 1992 onwards is partly because of the growing 
popularity of the IPE Brent futures contracts and partly because of 
the introduction of the Brent Contract for Differences (CFD), which 
have enabled companies to hedge cargoes priced against dated 
Brent without using the forward 15-day Brent market (see below). 
The 15-day Brent market is not just a European market. Brent 
is used as a price marker for the majority of internationally traded 
crudes and Brent forward paper contracts are traded around the 
globe 24 hours a day. When the London market closes trading 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.3lpage 3

--- Page 358/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
moves to Houston and when that closes to Tokyo and Singapore. 
Paper Brent is widely traded not only because it provides a 
valuable trading instrument outside Nymex and IPE trading hours, 
but also because it provides a better hedge for companies operating 
outside the US. In the Far East "partial" Brent contracts are also 
popular as these offer companies the opportunity of trading smaller 
volumes of oil. Once the IPE opens partial Brent contracts are 
usually converted into futures positions via the EFP delivery 
mechanism. 
Ta.xspinning 
It is important to realise that one of the reasons for the continued 
success of the 15-day Brent market is the tax regime operating on 
the UK Continental Shelf (UKCS). Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) 
is levied on companies producing oil on the basis of the "market 
price". In the case of bona-fide third party transactions, the tax 
reference price is the price of the deal. But in the case of internal 
transfers between (say) the production and refining subsidiaries of 
the same integrated company, the tax reference price for a given 
month is estimated as an average by the UK Office of Oil Taxation 
(OTO) using information supplied by companies over a 45 day 
trading period (see Chapter 15). 
In a falling market, differences between the two methods of 
valuing a cargo for tax purposes give integrated companies an 
incentive to sell to third parties since the average price assessed by 
the OTO lags behind the market. This is known as "tax Spinning", 
and UK government concerns about the potential scale of "lost" tax 
revenues have resulted in progressively tighter rules being 
introduced to limit the scope for spinning. Since January 1 1993, 
companies only have 24 hours in which to decide whether to 
nominate a cargo against a 15-day Brent trade for tax purposes. Of 
course the reverse applies if prices are rising, and it is likely that 
more dated cargoes will be available to wet chains in a falling 
market than in a rising market, which can affect the delivery risks 
for other companies. 
Contracts for differences (CFDs) 
Brent is also important because of the prominent role it plays in the 
pricing of internationally traded crude oil. The vast majority of 
Atlantic Basin crudes are currently priced using formulas that are 
explicitly linked to Brent, and many Arab Gulf crudes are implicitly 
linked to Brent as a result of close arbitrage between the 15-day 
Brent market and the paper Dubai market (see 7.5.1). Although 
7.3/page 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 359/964 ---
7 Forward PaPer markets 
2.50 
Backwardation Dated -1st Wnth 
2.00 I 
1.50 
1.00 
2 e 
tff 0.50 
0.00 
-0.50 
-1 .oo 
Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr Jul Ocl Jan Apr Jul Oct 
95 95 95 95 96 96 96 96 97 97 97 97 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 7.3Basts risk between dated and 15-day Brent 
most pricing formulas are usually based on dated Brent rather than 
15-day Brent, the need to hedge the value of cargoes while they are 
on the water means that many companies use the forward Brent 
market to hedge a wide variety of crudes in both the Atlantic Basin 
and the Arab Gulf markets. 
However, the scale of the residual basis risk between the 
nearby 15-day Brent contract and dated Brent has led to the 
development of an active intermediate market in "contracts for 
differences" or CFDs to provide companies with a more accurate 
hedging instrument (see Fig. 7.3). CFDs are a purely financial 
instrument -a price swap rather than a true forward contract -
but they are widely used as an extension of the 15-day Brent 
market. In the case of Brent, CFDs are now sufficiently liquid to 
generate regular published price assessments for over the four to 
six week period between the time horizon for prompt, wet dated 
Brent (loading 2-10 days ahead) and the time horizon for the first 
nearby 15-day forward paper Brent. 
CFDs are normally traded in relation to weekly delivery 
periods (Monday-Friday) and are settled on the basis of the average 
of published price assessments for the week in question. In the case 
of Brent, up to six forward weekly periods may be traded at any 
moment and prices are quoted at a differential to the nearby 15-day 
Brent forward market contract. For example, during late April 
1994 May Brent was already partly "wet" so CFDs were being 
quoted at a differential to June 15-day Brent, e.g. May 2-6 = June 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.3lpage 5

--- Page 360/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
+0.13/0.15, May 9-13 = June +0.09/0.13, and May 16-20 = June 
+0.05/0.08. 
CFDs allow companies buying and selling crude at prices 
related to dated Brent to control their exposure to the rapidly 
fluctuating differential between the dated and 15-day paper 
markets. For example, a refiner who buys another North Sea crude 
such as Forties loading in two weeks' time at a price of dated Brent 
+ 0.15 can fix the cost of the cargo using a combination of CFDs and 
15-day Brent. 
Assuming the deal was done in late April and the cargo is 
scheduled for loading at Hound Point in the date range 17-19 May, 
the refiner could fix the purchase price by buying a June 15-day 
Brent paper contract at the current market level of $15.75/bl and 
locking in the differential between dated and June Brent by buying 
a CFD for the week of May 16-20 at June + 0.06. As a result, the 
refiner is securely hedged not only against fluctuations in the 
absolute price of crude but also fluctuations in the differential 
between dated and 15-day Brent which could otherwise undermine 
the benefits of hedging. 
Example: Hedging using CFDs 
On 29 April, the refiner: 
buys Forties at dated Brent + 0.15 
buys June Brent at $15.75 
buys May 16-20 CFD at June + 0.06 
yielding an implied net price of $15.96 
The actual purchase price is established during the week when 
the cargo is lifted at which point the refiner closes out his 15-day 
Brent position, settles his CFD contract with the swaps provider 
and calculates the outcome of the Forties pricing formula. 
Assuming the Forties formula is based on the average of dated 
Brent quotations over a period of 5 days around the bill of lading 
(18 May), and the refiner sells his June 15-day Brent contract at 
$15.90/bl, the net price paid for the cargo of Forties is calculated as 
follows: 
average price for dated Brent (16-20 May): $16.00 
plus formula differential agreed for Forties + $0.15 
miitus profit on purchase and sale of June Brent -$0.15 
miitus net payment from swaps provider for CFD -$0.04 
equals net price paid by refiner $15.96 
7.3ipage 6 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 361/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
The advantages of using CFDs to improve the effectiveness of 
hedging are obvious from the example above. If the refiner had not 
used a CFD to fix the differential between the paper and dated 
markets he would have paid an extra 4 cents a barrel since the 
actual average differential between dated and June Brent in the 
week of 16-20 May turned out to be June + 0.10, 4 cents higher 
than the June + 0.06 quoted by the CFD market at the end of April. 
Of course, the differential might have narrowed instead of 
widening, in which case the refiner would have paid a higher price 
by hedging with CFDs. However, the purpose of hedging is to 
create certainty instead of uncertainty and what matters to the 
refiner is to be able to fix his purchase price whatever happens to 
the spread between dated and 15-day Brent. And this would not be 
possible without CFDs given the inherent volatility of the dated to 
paper spread. 
The introduction of CFDs has changed the structure of the 
Brent market as they have created an important parallel trading 
activity at the most volatile end of the forward market attracting 
the interest of the larger oil traders and Wall Street banks as well 
as the major oil companies. CFDs were first introduced by Shell 
and BP in the late 1980s and the CFD contract is still based on 
Shell terms. According to Petroleum Argus, industry sources 
estimate that more than 30 Brent CFDs are traded per day, the 
equivalent of at least 15 million b/d of crude. This compares with 25 
to 30 transactions on the 15-day Brent market (13 million b/d) and 
over 40 thousand lots on the IPE Brent futures market (41 million 
Wd). The success of Brent CFDs has also encouraged the IPE to 
propose the introduction of a dated Brent futures contract which 
would mimic the essential characteristics of the CFD market in an 
attempt to capture some of the liquidity and trading interest 
currently enjoyed by CFDs, but this has not met with much support 
from the industry (see Chapter 8). 
Participants 
The main participants in the 16day Brent market are oil 
companies producing North Sea crude, European and US refiners 
who lift North Sea crude, and the Wall Street investment banks 
and large international trading companies who act as market 
makers and provide essential liquidity. 
Over the last few years, the balance of trading activity 
between the main groups of participants has ebbed and flowed. 
Between 1990 and 1993, the Wall Street banks and the inter- 
national trading companies reduced their level of activity in the 15-
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.3lpage 7

--- Page 362/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
day Brent market, focusing instead on the rapidly expanding new 
markets in swaps and options (including CFDs). According to data 
collected by Petroleum Argus, these two groups of participants 
represented only 37 per cent of the deals reported in 1993 compared 
with 49 per cent in 1991. As a result, the importance of integrated 
and major oil companies grew again, rising to 50 per cent in 1993 
compared with only 40 per cent in 1991. However, the Wall Street 
banks and international trading companies expanded their 
presence again in the 15-day market during 1994 and 1995, partly 
because of the entry of new and important player, the US 
investment bank, J.P. Morgan, and partly because the trading 
companies need to hold large positions in the 15-day Brent market 
to balance their activities in Brent CFDs and swaps (see Table 7.3). 
Tahle 7.3Participants in the 15-day Brent market 
Participant 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 
Major 17% 23% 27% 26% 25% 25% 30% 
Integrated 23% 19% 23% 21% 15% 17% 14% 
Trader 27% 24% 17% 20% 22% 23% 18% 
Wall Street 22% 23% 20% 17% 25% 25% 22% 
Other 11% 11% 13% 16% 13% 10% 16% 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
The 15-day Brent market remains highly concentrated. In 
1997, more than three-quarters of the deals reported by Petroleum 
Argus involved one of only ten companies. According to Argus, the 
most active companies were: BP, J.P. Morgan, J.Aron, Phibro, 
Shell, Statoil, Koch, Arcadia, Morgan Stanley and Vitol. 
7.3.2 Naphtha 
The forward paper market for naphtha in north-west Europe 
continued to trade until 1996, when liquidity finally dried up as the 
market moved over entirely to swaps. Like naphtha swaps, the 
forward contract was based on imported cargoes from the Middle 
East, north Africa, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union 
(see Appendix 7.4). However, with such a wide range of sources it 
was difficult to devise a standard paper contract that is not only 
broad enough to satisfy the needs of the major participants but also 
narrow enough to avoid exploitation by unscrupulous traders. 
Despite calls for a better hedging instrument, the IPE failed in its 
attempt to launch a naphtha futures contract. Instead the industry 
~ turned to swaps which now provide the main hedging 
instrument (see Chapter 10). 
7.3ipage 8 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 363/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
7.3.3 Gasoil 
Gasoil is the largest product market in north-west Europe as it is 
used for both heating and automotive (diesel) purposes. The IPE 
has a very successful gasoil futures contract based on the 
Rotterdam barge market: but there were also two forward paper 
contracts that operated in parallel based on the cif NW European 
cargo markets for Russian gasoil and French heating oil or fuel oil 
domestique (FOD), each of which has slightly different quality 
specifications (see Appendix 7.1 and 1.5). 
The forward Russian gasoil market (sometimes known as 
"Russian Roulette") was the first foiward product paper market to 
be introduced into north-west Europe and was the main hedging 
instrument used by product traders until the IPE launched its 
second (and more successful) gasoil contract in 1984. After then, 
the volume of trading on the Russian gasoil market declined and 
the IPE became the most active contract from about 1988 onwards. 
Trading dried up altogether in 1995 because the quality, quantity 
and timing of Russian gasoil exports became too uncertain and 
companies now use swaps instead (see Chapter 10). In the past, 
differences in quality between the three hedging instruments and 
the closer links between the forward markets and the physical 
gasoil market ensured that the paper markets could provide a 
useful function, but companies now find that swaps and EFPs are a 
more effective means of handling basis risk. 
Tuble 7.4 European gusoil quality specificcrtions, 1998 
Characteristic German WE Russian French 
barges contract heating 
Specific gravity 0.845 0.820-0.860 0.836 up to 0.880 
Sulphur (Uhwt) 
Cetane index 0.2 max 
45 min 0.2 max 
45 min 0.2 max 0.2 max 
40 min 
Pour point ("C) -9 n.a. -1 5 -9 
Cloud point C T ) +R(+l)* +5(+1)* -1 2 +2 
CFPP ("C) -7(-11)* -41-1 l)* -1 2 4 
'k suinmer(winler) 
The more transparent IPE gasoil market became the price 
reference first for the forward markets and now the swaps market. 
Prices are quoted and deals done at a differential to the IPE. In 
addition, traders can use the EFP mechanism to take advantage of 
the credit protection offered by the exchange and its clearing house. 
Although the forward FOD market lasted longer than the forward 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.3lpage 9

--- Page 364/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Russian market, trading dried up towards the end of 1996 and all 
the liquidity has now moved into swaps. 
7.3.4 Fuel oil 
The heavy fuel oil market in Europe is highly fragmented since the 
quality specifications differ considerably from market to market. In 
Scandinavia and Germany only low sulphur fuel oil can be burnt in 
power stations. However, attempts to create a forward paper 
market for low sulphur fuel oil delivered into Sweden during the 
mid-1980s did not succeed and there is now a low sulphur fuel oil 
swaps market instead. In addition, there is an active high sulphur 
fuel oil swaps market based on the Rotterdam barge market. 
There used to be an active forward paper contract for CIF 
cargoes of high sulphur fuel oil delivered into the Littlebrook power 
station in the UK, but this has ceased trading (see Appendix 7.2). 
The UK utilities market represented the lower end of the quality 
scale which is also closest to the bunker market. Companies trading 
Littlebrook grade fuel oil therefore used it to hedge bunker grade 
fuel oil in other markets, for example tenders into the Middle East, 
but this is now done with swaps (see Chapter 10). 
7.3.5 Propane 
The development of a flourishing spot market in north-west Europe 
for liquefied petroleum gases (LPGs), butane and propane, based 
mainly on North Sea production initially encouraged the 
development of forward markets for hedging cargo-sized quantities. 
The most active of these was the forward "flexi"-propane contract 
but this is no longer active (see Appendix 7.3). The growing 
volatility of the price spread between butane and propane has also 
prompted (unsuccessful 1 attempts to start an equivalent forward 
butane market. As with other forward paper markets, companies 
now find that price swaps can provide most of their hedging needs 
(see Chapter 10). 
7.3ipage 10 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 365/964 ---
7.4 United States 
Although the United States is generally regarded as the home of oil 
futures following the success of the Nymex crude oil, gasoline and 
heating oil contracts, it is important to realise that there are still a 
number of active forward markets for both crude oil and refined 
products that operate in parallel with the futures markets. The 
existence of a large network of open-access pipelines which is used 
to move oil from the producer to the refiner, and the refiner to the 
consumer, has created the basis for a number of forward markets, 
such as the "cash" WTI and the Colonial Pipeline product markets. 
In addition, the product import requirements of the markets in 
Boston and New York Harbors have led to the development of 
forward markets based on waterborne delivery. But trading 
volumes declined following the introduction of the Nymex "Access" 
system which enables market participants to trade futures 
contracts almost continuously around the clock (see Chapter 8). 
And activity in both the spot and forward markets has been further 
depressed by new environmental rules which have left the US oil 
products markets increasingly fragmented. 
7.4.1 Crude oil 
The linch-pin of the US crude oil market is West Texas 
Intermediate (WTI) which is traded in a variety of forms, including 
forward "cash WTI" contracts for delivery in 1,000 barrel lots at 
Cushing, Oklahoma. It also forms the basis for the Nymex light 
sweet crude contract since it is one of the delivery options and 
represents the most active spot market for crude oil in the United 
States (see Chapter 4). 
WTI is a blend of crude oils collected by pipeline from oil fields 
in New Mexico and West Texas. Current production amounts to 
around 0.5 million b/d. Unlike the international cargo markets 
which allow companies to trade oil for delivery at very short notice, 
US pipeline operators expect traders to nominate their delivery 
programmes before the end of the month preceding delivery. As a 
result, the "spot" or "nearby" de1iveis.y month in the US crude 
market is usually equivalent to the fnst forward month in the 
Brent market. All US crude contracts therefore start trading 
further ahead than the prompt market in Europe and the closing 
date for pipeline nominations determines both the delivery date for 
the Nymex light sweet crude contract and the roll-oveim date for the 
US crude oil market. Pipeline nominations must be made by the 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.4lpage 1

--- Page 366/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
25th of the month preceding delivery (or the first business day 
before the 25th if this is not a business day) to allow time for 
scheduling, and the Nymex light sweet crude contract ceases 
trading three business days earlier in order to allow companies to 
make or take delivery of physical crude oil in the following month. 
Cash markets therefore continue to trade each delivery month for 
up to three days after the expiry of the Nymex light sweet crude 
contract. 
Cash WTI is both a spot and a forward market. Contracts for 
the nearby (first forward) month are effectively spot contracts since 
it is not possible to trade closer to the delivery date. But contracts 
for delivery months further ahead are forward paper contracts that 
can be used to achieve a variety of trading objectives, although 
liquidity is now confined to only the first three forward delivery 
months and longer term deals are usually executed directly on the 
Nymex futures market or as a swap (see Chapter 10). Like 15-day 
Brent, cash WTI can be traded when the futures exchanges are 
closed and provides a useful vehicle for responding to events, such 
as the Gulf War, that may disturb the markets when the Nymex is 
closed. Also, like 15-day Brent, it allows companies to trade much 
larger volumes in a single transaction than can be achieved on the 
futures market and the average cash WTI deal is the equivalent of 
50-75 futures contracts. 
Because of the size and importance of the Nymex Light Sweet 
Crude contract, cash WTI deals are usually negotiated and agreed 
at a differential to the futures price (see Chapter 4). During 
exchange trading hours companies deal on the basis of the current 
bid and ask levels quoted by the futures market, but outside normal 
trading hours the market either uses the latest settlement price or 
trades at a differential to prices quoted by the Nymex Access 24 
hour trading system. Although cash WTI is an unregulated forward 
market, companies can also use the Nymex EFP procedures to 
obtain the protection offered by the futures exchange. 
In addition to the forward market for cash WTI at Cushing, 
forward contracts are also traded for rateable quantities (i.e. b/d 
rather than barrels) of WTI at Midland, Texas which is the point at 
which WTI can be either pumped north to Cushing and the mid- 
continent refiners, or south to the Gulf coast. However, the trading 
horizon for WTI Midland contracts is even shorter. than for cash 
WTI at Cushing and liquidity is now concentrated in the first 
forward month. The WTI Midland market typically trades in 
contract multiples of 2,500 Wd per month. A number of other spot 
pipeline crude markets also have a limited forward dimension. The 
most liquid of these are West Texas Sour (WTS) and Light 
7.4/page 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 367/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
Louisiana Sweet (LLS), which also trade in multiples of 2,500 b/d 
per month. 
In addition to the forward pipeline markets for Lower 48 
crudes, there also used to be a forward cargo market for Alaskan 
North Slope (ANS) crude delivered to the US Gulf coast. But, 
although this was an active and liquid market in the mid-1980s 
when large volumes of ANS moved to the Gulf coast, the forward 
market has completely dried up as most of the ANS is either refined 
by west coast refiners or can now be exported to other Far East 
refiners. The Gulf coast ANS market no longer provides a reliable 
price marker and producers such as Saudi Arabia, Mexico and 
Ecuador have been obliged to remove ANS quotations from their 
term pricing formulas for crudes delivered into the US market. 
7.4.2 Refined products 
The US also retains a few forward product markets that operate in 
parallel with the much more liquid futures markets on the Nymex. 
As with crude, the forward product markets allow companies to 
hedge or speculate against the price differential (or basis) between 
the highly standardised quality and delivery terms of the futures 
contract and the slightly different terms associated with physical 
delivery in the most active spot markets. But, although the delivery 
terms are different, the pricing mechanism remains the same and 
all forward clean product contracts are negotiated and priced at a 
differential to the relevant futures contract and often subsequently 
converted into futures positions using the Nymex EFP delivery 
procedures. 
The two most active forward products markets in the US are 
the Colonial Pipeline market and the "Boston Bingo" cargo market. 
Smaller scale forward paper markets for utility grade 1 per cent 
sulphur fuel oil imported into the US Atlantic coast and 3 per cent 
sulphur fuel oil on the US Gulf Coast have now been replaced with 
swaps (see Chapter 10). 
Colonial Pipeline 
The Colonial Pipeline delivers white products from the US Gulf 
coast to the North-eastern states and the forward market allows 
companies to trade the basis between the Gulf coast market and the 
New York Harbor market which underpins the Nymex products 
contracts. The Colonial Pipeline market is based on the forward 
delivery periods (or cycles) and the standard delivery grades 
specified by the pipeline company. Each delivery cycle covers a 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.4lpage 3

--- Page 368/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
period of 10 days, making three cycles per month, although it is 
also possible to trade shorter half-cycle periods. 
The minimum batch size is 25,000 barrels. The forward market 
trades conventional southern (M) grade gasoline and No. 2 heating 
oil (76 grade). Activity is centred on the last cycle of the month -
which is effectively an "any month" contract because delivery is at 
the seller's option. But trade beyond the current month has become 
rare and much of the hedging has been transferred to customised 
swaps. 
The Colonial gasoline market is still the most active gasoline 
market in the US, trading an estimated 150,000 b/d in 25,000 
barrel lots. Attempts by the Nymex to capture some of the basis 
trading activity currently enjoyed by the forward product market 
by launching a competing Gulf coast gasoline contract failed 
because the industry still needs a trading instrument that is closely 
linked to the cash market with three delivery cycles per month 
rather than the monthly settlement offered by the Nymex contract. 
However, changes to US gasoline quality specifications on a state 
by state basis as a result of the US Clean Air Act -especially since 
the introduction of reformulated gasoline in January 1995 (see 
Chapter 2) -have fragmented the gasoline market and reduced 
the effectiveness of both the forward and futures markets as 
hedging instruments. It has also narrowed the focus of most traders 
onto the very prompt cash markets. 
The Colonial jet and heating oil markets are more seasonal 
than the gasoline market and mainly flourish during the winter 
months from October to April. During peak periods the market 
trades an estimated 150,000 bld of heating oil and the 75,000 bld of 
jet kerosine in 25,000 barrel lots. The market is now dominated by 
local refiners since the Wall Street banks -who used to play the 
role of market maker -abandoned it in recent years. 
Boston Bingo 
The US Atlantic coast from New York to Boston is the main 
destination of imported cargoes of refined products from Europe 
and South America. The Boston Harbor market enables companies 
to trade the basis between imported cargoes of gasoline and heating 
oil and the relevant Nymex futures contracts. It acts primarily as a 
hedge on the difference in volume between the Nymex barge 
contract and the much larger imported cargoes. The "Boston Bingo" 
markets tend to be highly seasonal, a forward market for imported 
gasoline cargoes operates in the spring, while a forward market for 
heating oil operates in the autumn. Both markets trade paper 
cargoes for delivery into Boston (or other north-east ports) during 
7.4ipage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 369/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
half-month delivery periods. Quality specifications are based on 
Colonial Pipeline grades for gasoline and heating oil. 
The Boston Bingo markets are used primarily by importers 
seeking to hedge large physical quantities of gasoline or heating oil. 
On average the markets trade about ten 225,000 barrel cargoes per 
month for each product type, although the seasonal peak can be 
higher. Most of the trading activity is for small part cargoes up to 
15 days out. Volumes used to be much higher in the 1980s when 
large traders such as Clarendon, Vitol and Stinnes played an active 
role in the import market and used the Boston Bingo forward 
contract to hedge the value of their cargoes and to speculate on the 
level of backwardation or contango. However, exporters such as 
Venezuela are now selling directly to companies with retail outlets 
which do not routinely use the forward cargo market for hedging. 
In addition, the fragmentation of the gasoline market because of 
environmental regulations has reduced the volume traded and 
narrowed the focus to the next two half-month periods. Many US 
distributors now buy gasoline in Europe on an fob basis and do not 
trade the cargoes. As a result, the speculative activity which 
boosted forward trading volumes in the early 1990's has 
disappeared, leaving the Nymex futures contract as the primary 
vehicle for hedging gasoline imports. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.4lpage 5

--- Page 370/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 371/964 ---
7.5 Arab Gulf and Far East 
Oil derivatives, including forward and futures markets, are still 
relatively underdeveloped in the Arab Gulf and Far East. The 
reasons for this are not entirely clear, but it is due partly to the 
reluctance of many potential participants to get involved in what 
they perceive as a purely speculative trading activity, partly to the 
continued importance of term contracts, and partly to the generally 
lower level of price volatility in these markets. As a result, it has 
proved difficult to establish liquid markets for oil derivatives 
contracts and those that have taken root have much lower levels of 
liquidity than their counterparts in Europe or the US. 
In the case of crude oil, the most active forward market 
remains the Dubai paper market, although this is now much less 
active than it used to be because of falling production levels for 
Dubai crude, and it now trades mainly as an extension of the 15-
day Brent market and is gradually being replaced with swaps. In 
the case of products, the foiward naphtha market was temporarily 
undermined by the reduction in exports from the Arab Gulf 
following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the abolition of controls 
on the level of refinery throughputs in Japan. But changes to 
contract specifications to allow alternative sources of imports and 
the reconstruction of Kuwait's refineries have restored liquidity to 
the open-specification naphtha market which is based on imports 
into Japan. Although some liquidity has moved from the forward 
paper. market to swaps, some traders in the Far East still prefer to 
use a market that has a clear physical basis. However, swaps are 
gaining in popularity in the region, especially for other products, 
and have contributed to the difficulties facing the Simex fuel oil 
futures contract (see Chapter 8). 
7.5.1 Dubai crude 
The Dubai market is the on1.y true forward crude market operating 
in the Far East. Other forward paper markets such as the "paper" 
Tapis market are based on swaps rather than physical delivery (see 
Chapter 10). Together with Oman, Dubai is widely used as the 
pricing basis for. most term contracts involving Arab Gulf crudes 
moving east. But liquidity on the forward Dubai market is falling 
as companies switch to swaps, which provide a more flexible 
hedging mechanism (see Fig. 7.4). 
In the past, forward Dubai trading volumes rivalled those of 
Brent, but, since the Gulf crisis, liquidity has greatly diminished 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.5lpage 1

--- Page 372/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
UBrent-Dubai spreads 
350 I
300 Inter-month spreads 
HOutright deals 
250 
-a) 
m 
230 
0 
z QE 150 
3 
z 
100 
50 
0 
1Q92 1Q93 1Q94 1Q95 1Q96 1Q97 1Q98 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 7.4 Reported trading volumes in Dubai forward market 
and the majority of paper Dubai deals are now either spread trades 
against the 15-day Brent market or inter-month spreads in the 
Dubai market itself. Outright trading in forward Dubai has 
virtually dried up because of problems with cargo nomin at'ion 
procedures and the impact of monthly tenders by the Indian Oil 
Company which often takes most of the available cargoes. However, 
liquidity recovered to some extent following the introduction of 
tighter nomination procedures in Conoco's new General Terms & 
Conditions from May 1994. Since 1996, trading levels in the Dubai 
market have averaged 2-3 deals per day compared with only 1-2 in 
1993. But the volume of swap trading rose sharply in 1997 as 
Chinese traders entered the market to hedge their growing 
imports. Swaps are more flexible than the forward Dubai contract 
as they can be tailored to individual needs and do not involve 
difficult cargo nominations. 
Contract 
The forward market for Dubai trades 500,000 barrel cargoes of 
Dubai Fateh crude delivered fob the Fateh terminal in the Arab 
Gulf. The contract is based on Conoco's standard terms and 
conditions which were revised in 1994 after extensive consultation 
with market participants to overcome problems with the 
nomination procedure (see below). Prices are negotiated in US 
dollars per barrel, usually as a spread against 15-day Brent or 
7.5/page 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 373/964 ---
7 Forward paper markets 
between forward delivery months in the Dubai market. There is 
also an active paper market in "partial" Dubai contracts for 
companies that want to trade smaller quantities, and a growing 
Dubai swaps market mainly used by companies involved in 
processing deals (see Chapter 10). 
Dubai is a medium gravity sour crude very similar to Saudi 
Arabian Light. Although production is relatively low for an Arab 
Gulf crude (only 0.3 million b/d), the fact that there are a large 
number of equity producers involved makes it a suitable choice for 
the physical basis of a forward paper market. The field operator is 
Conoco (30 per cent), but Total and Repsol also have major share 
holdings of 30 per cent and 25 per cent respectively. Other equity 
producers include Texaco/Rheinoel (10 per cent), and Wintershall (5 
per cent). Former shareholder Sun sold its 5 per cent share to Total 
in 1993. However, falling production threatens to undermine the 
market over the next few years (see Chapter 4). 
Organisation 
The organisation and operation of the Dubai market is very similar 
to the 15-day Brent market, although the volumes are much 
smaller. Companies trading in the Dubai market buy and sell paper 
contracts for delivery up to six months ahead and the market turns 
over many times the underlying physical volume of Dubai before 
cargoes become available for loading. Like Brent, most of the paper 
deals are "booked out" before the delivery month approaches, 
leaving only those companies that want to take physical delivery 
holding open positions. 
However, the nomination procedure for Dubai is different from 
Brent since it is the buyer rather than the seller who nominates the 
lifting dates (subject to the agreement of the loading terminal). In 
the Dubai market, companies wishing to take delivery of a physical 
cargo nominate their preferred lifting dates to the terminal 
operators either directly or down a daisy chain before the lifting 
schedule is announced. According to the contract, nominations 
cannot be "unreasonably rejected", but delays in passing on dates 
and the declining number of physical Dubai cargoes meant that 
companies were not only unable to obtain their preferred dates but 
also did not receive their revised dates until very late in the day. In 
June 1993 a chain collapsed when a company refused to lift a cargo 
saying that it had not received the loading dates until after the 
nomination deadline, the 18th of the preceding month. As a result, 
the terminal operator, Conoco, has revised its General Terms and 
Conditions to prevent traders abusing the system. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.5lpage 3

--- Page 374/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
From May 1994, buyers must submit requests for loading dates 
seuen London business days before the 18th of the month preceding 
loading (the deadline for equity holders is five days). The loading 
programme will then be released to equity holders three days before 
the 18th and all dates must be passed to buyers before 6pm London 
time on the 18th. In order to prevent delays, companies involved in 
chains must pass dates on within one hour of receiving them and 
the contract allows buyers to take legal action for damages against 
a seller for late transmission of dates. 
In 1995, confusion over three paper chains from the September 
programme resulted in a "dry chain" in which no physical oil was 
delivered. Although this did cause problems for those concerned, 
Conoco has not yet proposed any further changes to its GT&Cs 
since traders failed to come up with any detailed suggestions to 
prevent this from happening again in the future. 
Participants 
The number and type of participants in the Dubai market has 
changed radically over the years. The market was originally 
dominated by the Japanese trading houses (sogo shosha) who were 
looking for a more appropriate hedging mechanism for Arab Gulf 
crudes than 15-day Brent. Other participants included the major oil 
companies and Dubai equity producers. However, many of the 
shosha left the market at the end of 1987 following heavy losses 
and their place was taken by the Wall Street companies who now 
play the role of market maker in so many markets. 
In the 1990s, the main participants are now the large trading 
companies since many producers and end-users have ceased to play 
an active role in the paper Dubai market. According to Petroleurn 
Argus, the most active companies in 1997 were Phibro, BP, Shell, 
Statoil, Total, Arcadia, Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), Vitol, Mitsui, 
and Koch. Many of these also use the market to supply oil to IOC 
which issues regular tenders, although IOC has recently avoided 
buying Dubai in some months. 
7.5.2 Naphtha 
The Japanese open-spec naphtha market has recovered much of it.s 
liquidity and is now restored to its former position as the primary 
forward product market in the Far East (see Fig. 7.5). The loss of 
key sources of supply in the Arab Gulf following the Iraqi invasion 
of Kuwait left companies wary of trading in a market that 
depended on physical delivery of naphtha from only a small 
number of allowable sources. As a result the volume of swaps 
7.5ipage 4 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 375/964 ---
I 
7 Forward paper markets 
Open specificafion "T 
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 
Source: Petroleum Argus 
Figure 7.5 Tradtn-g volum,es in the Asia Pacific n,aphtha market 
trading increased rapidly in the early 199Os, largely at the expense 
of the open-spec naphtha market. But the reconstruction of 
Kuwait's refineries, the expansion of the petro-chemical industry in 
the Far East, and the decision to relax strict controls on ports of 
origin from October 1996 revitalised the market. Open-spec 
naphtha trading volumes recovered sharply from 1995 onwards, 
averaging 6-8 deals per week in 1996 and 1997 compared with only 
1-2 deals per week in 1994. However, activity slumped in early 
1998 as the Asian financial crisis deepened. 
Contmct 
The Far East open-spec naphtha market trades paper cargoes of 
naphtha for forward delivery C&F Japan during an agreed half- 
month delivery period. The standard cargo size is 25,000 tonnes, 
subject to an operational tolerance of 10 per cent. Prices are 
negotiated in US dollars per tonne. The market now accepts 
cargoes from any port of origin, subject to certain minimum quality 
specifications. 
Constraints on both the origin of the naphtha and its 
destination have been a subject of controversy amongst market 
participants over the past few years, adding to the problems facing 
the contract. Following pressure from South Korean traders, the 
1996 annual naphtha forum finally agreed to allow cargoes from 
anywhere in the world to be offered for delivery into Japan against 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.5lpage 5

--- Page 376/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
the forward open-spec naphtha contract from October 1996. But 
moves to expand the delivery terms to include Korea and Taiwan 
are still being resisted. The contract was also changed in 1991 to 
bring it more in line with the European open-spec naphtha market. 
7.5/page 6 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 377/964 ---
7.6 Future developments 
Forward paper contracts continue to be an important sector of the 
oil market. Neither futures 01-swaps have been able to replace 
them entirely, although both are often more convenient to use. The 
close link between the underlying physical market and forward 
paper contracts makes them ideally suited to companies that are in 
the business of supplying physical oil and the need for an effective 
short-term hedging instrument has inevitably attracted the interest 
of the bigger traders and banks who are willing to take on the price 
risk associated with the near-term oil market. 
15-day Brent remains a special case since it has become the 
linch-pin of the international crude market. Although the Nymex 
light sweet crude contract is the most actively traded, it will never 
replace Brent because WTI is ultimately a domestic pipeline crude 
that cannot be exported. Brent and WTI prices often diverge and 
companies trading on the international crude market need an 
alternative instrument. Nor can the IPE Brent futures contract 
provide an adequate substitute since it is based on a price index 
rather than physical delivery and expires too far ahead. With so 
much price volatility in the short-term, companies need a market 
that responds to the underlying fundamentals, and the current 
combination of 15-day Brent and CFDs fulfils this function highly 
effectively for most participants. 
Finally, the continued threat of tougher regulation for 
derivatives such as swaps and OTC options is likely to ensure that 
the oil market retains its cun’ent diverse set of trading 
instruments. Because forward markets ultimately involve physical 
delivery, they have usua11.y been excluded fimm regulation designed 
to combat speculation and protect individual investors. If plans to 
control derivatives trading are implemented, forward markets 
could become more popular again. 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 7.6lpage 1

--- Page 378/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 379/964 ---
Appendix 7.1 Russian gasoil 
The forward Russian gasoil market is currently inactive, but the 
contract specifications are retained here for reference together with 
a brief history of the market. 
Contract 
The Russian gasoil market trades paper cargoes of gasoil for 
delivery cif ARA during the first half (1-15) of the month. The 
contract specifications were drawn up by brokers. The cargo size 
can vary from 18-22,000 tonnes and the specification is based on an 
agreed range of quality characteristics for gasoil exports from the 
former Soviet Union (see Table ‘7.4). Prices are negotiated in US 
dollars per tonne, usually at a differential to the IPE gasoil futures 
market. 
History 
Although Russian gasoil is valued for its excellent quality 
characteristics, in particular its good cold properties, the quality 
has become much more variable as a result of the organisational 
chaos affecting most of the oil industry in the former Soviet Union 
and disputes over the ownership and operation of refinery, pipeline 
and terminal facilities in Latvia. As a result, not all cargoes 
exported can be sure of meeting the quality specifications required 
by the forward paper market; traders have also had difficulty 
obtaining cargoes large enough to deliver into the forward contract. 
In particular there have been frequent problems with bacterial 
contamination, especially in the summer when higher 
temperatures encourage the growth of bacteria in old and poorly 
managed storage facilities. 
Russian gasoil is expected to be a good quality gasoil with a 
low specific gravity, sulphur content and cloud point and a high 
cetane index. Its properties ensure that it is suitable for both 
automotive and heating uses. It is also valued as a blending 
component for winter grades. In the past, Russian gasoil was 
subject to EEC import duties (3.5 per cent of the cif landed value) 
and traders tried to take advantages of vai*ious loopholes in the 
legislation to avoid paying import dut.y. Such loopholes included 
attempts to classify gasoil as a feedstock (which are duty free) by 
treating it with caustic soda (known as “stabilisation”) 01-flashing it 
through a vacuum distillation unit. 
Supplement 2 Jun 1996 Appendix 7.l/page 1

--- Page 380/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
In the 1980s, a spectacular failure in the stabilisation process 
left heating oil purchasers with gasoil that would not burn and 
resulted in tighter rules for importers and the banning of caustic 
soda treatment in the Netherlands. Since 1990, however, gasoil 
imports from the former Soviet Union have been exempt from 
import duties. Ironically, the widespread bacterial contamination of 
Russian gasoil in the summer of 1992 could have been more easily 
contained if the caustic soda treatment had been continued. 
In the Russian gasoil market companies selling forward 
contracts are obliged to give buyers two clear working days' notice 
of the arrival of a cargo that is to be nominated against the paper 
contract. Since the contract is a cif delivery contract it is possible 
for cargoes to be rolled over from one delivery period to the next 
thus incurring demurrage charges on the vessel carrying the cargo. 
When the market is in contango this can be an attractive option for 
traders and rapidly escalating and punitive demurrage charges 
were introduced for Russian vessels carrying gasoil exports to 
Europe. As a result, disputes over the responsibility for demurrage 
charges are a recurrent feature of the Russian gasoil market. 
The main players in the Russian gasoil market were the 
companies who have contracts to import Russian gasoil. Most of the 
trading was conducted by a small group of companies who included 
Vulcan, AOT and Galaxy. However, problems with the quality, 
quantity and timing of Russian gasoil exports since 1994 have 
effectively killed the market since traders cannot be sure of 
obtaining material that meets the specifications of the forward 
paper contract. If Russian gasoil exports become more reliable 
again, the market could revive -although this may be difficult to 
achieve given the current widespread use of swaps and futures for 
hedging. 
Appendix 7.llpage 2 Supplement 2 Jun 1996

--- Page 381/964 ---
Appendix 7.2 Littlebrook fuel oil 
The forward Littlebrook fuel oil market no longer exists, but the 
contract specifications are retained here for reference together with 
a brief history of the market. 
Contract 
The forward market for heavy fuel oil used to trade cargoes of high 
sulphur fuel oil for cif delivery in the fust half of each calendar 
month (1-15) to the Littlebrook power station on the Thames 
estuary in the UK. For this reason it was also known as the 
"Littlebrook" market or the "Littlebrook Lottery". The contract size 
was 20,000 tonnes and was based on the quality specifications 
required by National Power, one of the two UK main utility 
companies. The contract itself was based on BP terms and 
conditions. Prices were negotiated in US dollars per tonne at 
outright levels. 
Littlebrook quality specifications are highly flexible and allow 
traders to deliver 3 per cent high sulphur fuel oil of up to 1.005 
specific gravity, a high vanadium content (330ppm) and a high 
viscosity level (120cst at SO'C). However, the forward paper 
contract was based on a specific gravity of 0.998 since most other 
major European utilities have much tighter quality specifications 
for high sulphur fuel oil, with lower limits for specific gravity, 
viscosity and vanadium content and the bunker market requires 
fuel oil with a specific gravity less than water, i.e. under 1.000. 
History 
Liquidity in the Littlebrook market suffei,ed a major setback in 
1989 when the UK authorities started to levy VAT on non-domestic 
fuel and power. As a result, fuel oil imported into the UK became 
liable to VAT at the point of discharge, the VAT being the liability 
of the importer. and not the original supplier. Since 95 per cent of 
the cargoes nominated into Littlebrook chains are of non-UK origin, 
the changes created a significant price risk for companies not 
registered for VAT in the UK and trading volumes slumped. The 
market has now ceased trading altogether. During the early 199Os, 
trading volumes averaged 4-5 deals per day for delivery periods of 
up to three months ahead compared with 10-15 in the late 1980s. 
The original Littlebrook contract was not designed to cope with 
the question of VAT and the documentation was often inadequate 
Supplement 2 Jun 1996 Appendix 7.2fpage 1

--- Page 382/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
even for those companies registered for VAT. However, changes to 
the contract proposed by Shell made it clear that cargoes may be 
liable for VAT and ensured that cargoes will be supplied with a 
valid tax invoice. As a result, many companies initially returned to 
the Littlebrook market but trading eventually dried up as 
companies transferred their interest to swaps. 
The bulk of the activity in the Littlebrook market was 
conducted by traders such as Phibro, Vitol and Cargill and refiners 
such as Shell, Texaco and Chevron. The ultimate buyers were, of 
course, the power utilities who are regular purchasers on the spot 
market, but most of the paper activity was between traders and 
refiners for delivery periods about two months ahead. 
Appendix 7.2lpage 2 Supplement 2 Jun 1996

--- Page 383/964 ---
Appendix 7.3 Flexi-propane 
The forward flexi-propane market no longer exists, but the contract 
specifications are retained here for reference together with a brief 
history of the market. 
Contract 
The forward "flexif'-propane market used to trade paper cargoes of 
propane for delivery ex-ship at Flushing (or a number of other 
specified delivery locations) during an agreed forward delivery 
month. Cargo sizes were up to 10,000 tonnes. Trading activity 
usually averaged less than one cargo a day for delivery periods of 
up to three months ahead. Prices were negotiated in US dollars per 
tonne at fixed levels. 
Propane is produced both by refiners and as a by-product from 
oil and gas fields. Most of the propane delivered into the NW 
Europe flexi-propane contract is produced from North Sea fields. It 
is used as a final product for heating or as feedstock for 
petrochemical plants. It requires specialised transportation, 
delivery and storage facilities. Limited storage capacity and the 
seasonal nature of heating demand mean that the market is more 
active in the winter and prices often rise sharply at this time. 
History 
The forward propane market operated for about five years between 
1989 and 1994 and was used by about 20 companies, mainly major 
oil companies such as BP and Shell which are involved in 
producing propane in the North Sea, large petrochemical 
companies such as ICI and Dow who regularly buy propane, and 
traders such as Vitol and Transammonia. At its peak in 1990 the 
flexi-propane market traded up to 100 cargoes per month, but 
volumes fell sharply as companies stated using swaps instead. 
Towards the end of 1994 trading volumes fell to around 10 cargoes 
per. month, posing problems for companies trying to close out 
forward positions. The major producei*s, BP and Shell, initially 
supported the contract which they regarded as a useful hedging 
instrument for. the North Sea market, but they now prefer to use 
swaps. 
Supplement 2 Jun 1996 Appendix 7.3/page 1

--- Page 384/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 385/964 ---
Appendix 7.4 European O/S naphtha 
The European forward open-specification lOjS,i naphtha market no 
longer exists, but the contract specifications are retained here for 
reference together with a brief history of the market. 
Contract 
The open-spec (O/S) naphtha market used to trade paper cargoes of 
naphtha for C&F delivery in the ARA range between the 5th and 
the 25th of the month. The cargo size could be anywhere between 
20,000 to 25,000 tonnes and the specification allowed for a broad 
range of naphthenic and paraffinic naphthas suitable for use both 
in the refining and petrochemical industries. The forward contract 
was based on the Dow open-spec naphtha contract. Prices are 
negotiated in US dollars per tonne at fixed levels. 
Naphtha is a light fraction produced by atmospheric 
distillation with boiling points between 30 and 180 degrees 
centigrade. It is used by refiners as a feedstock for catalytic 
reformers to make gasoline and by petrochemical companies as a 
cracker feedstock to make ethylene. The contract specification was 
very broad and allowed for product of any origin to be delivered as 
long as it meets the quality parameters. Attempts to narrow the 
quality range were resisted as this would limit the number of 
cargoes that could be nominated and increase the risk of squeezes. 
The most important quality specifications are the proportion of 
paraffinic hydrocarbons (minimum content: 65 per cent) and the 
presence of MTBE. Paraffinic hydrocarbons determine its 
suitability as a reformer feedstock and trace quantities of MTBE 
can render it unsuitable as a petrochemical feedstock. Because 
naphtha is a feedstock destined for further processing, cargoes are 
not liable for import duty and are exempt f?om VAT. As a result, 
the open-spec naphtha market avoided the problems caused in 
other forward markets by the introduction of new (and imprecise) 
VAT rules from 1January 1993 (see Appendix 7.2). 
History 
The open-spec naphtha contract originally had an unusually large 
volume tolerance of 1'7,000 to 25,000 tonnes which created problems 
when cargoes were nominated. The wide tolerance was necessary to 
allow for delivery of cargo quantities from a wide variety of origins, 
but traders also used it to maximise their gains or minimise their 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 Appendix 7.4/page 1

--- Page 386/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
losses. In the past, extensive use of the delivery tolerance meant 
that companies were frequently left with part cargoes of naphtha 
that had not been nominated into a paper chain leading to disputes 
over ownership. Furthermore, it was not possible to nominate more 
than 17,000 tonnes on the last trading day which could leave 
companies holding an unwanted 8,000 tonnes of naphtha, nearly 40 
per cent of the initial cargo volume. 
As a result of frequent "abuses", changes to the contract were 
introduced in November 1990 to reduce the benefits from the 
"tolerance game" and to allow companies to nominate the full 
25,000 tonnes on the last day of trading. In the new contract, cargo 
nominations of up to 21,000 tonnes are priced at the fixed price 
agreed by the buyer and seller, but nominations for the remaining 
4,000 tonnes are priced according to market quotes. The formula 
used takes the average of Platt’s low quotations for the last five 
working days of the delivery period. 
The open-spec naphtha contract has also been prone to 
squeezes since only a small number of physical cargoes are typically 
used to wet paper chains. At its peak, the open-spec naphtha 
market traded about 350 contracts per month and chains involving 
over 60 deals were common, but the forward market has lost most 
of its former liquidity to swaps and now trades about one cargo a 
week. 
In 1989 a prompt squeeze by one of the large trading 
companies stifled liquidity in the market and it took the Gulf crisis 
and changes to the contract to boost liquidity again. Attempts by 
the IPE to capitalise on the problems in the open-spec market by 
launching a naphtha futures contract in 1991, have so far failed 
and the forward naphtha market continued to thrive until recently. 
During 1992, however, concerns over the hedging efficiency of the 
open-spec market, in particular the basis risk created by the 
delivery tolerance, have prompted a decline in forward trading as 
many of the participants switched to swaps instead. Forward 
market trading volumes fell dramatically from around 200 per 
month in 1991 to around 5 per month in 1995 while the volume of 
swaps trading has grown and trading finally dries up in 1996. 
The main players in the open-spec naphtha market were 
refiners, petrochemical companies and traders who import cargoes 
from North Africa and the Middle East. All these companies now 
also trade swaps. 
Appendix 7.4lpage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 387/964 ---
Appendix 7.5 Fuel oil domestique 
The European forward fuel oil domestique lFODj market no longer 
exists, but the contract specifications are retained here for reference 
together with a brief history of the market. 
Contract 
The fuel oil domestique (FOD) market used to trade forward (or 
flexi) cargoes for delivery cif Le Havi-e during half-month delivery 
periods up to six months forward. Unlike Russian gasoil, the FOD 
market traded both halves of the month (1-15 and 16-30/31). Cargo 
sizes were typically in the range 20-25,000 tonnes and prices were 
negotiated in US dollars per tonne at a differential to the nearby 
IPE gasoil futures contract. In the frst half of the month the 
nearby IPE contract is for the same calendar month, but in the 
second half of the month the nearby IPE contract will be for next 
calendar month. For example, second half April and first half May 
FOD contracts trade at a differential to May IPE gasoil. 
The quality specifications of fuel oil domestique were the same 
for summer and winter. FOD is a low sulphur gasoil with good 
automotive characteristics, typically 48 cetane (see Table 7.4). In 
winter it is only suitable for heating as its cold properties do not 
meet the more stringent requirements of gasoil moteur (GOM), but 
in summer it could be used to supply both the heating and 
automotive markets -although this was no longer possible after 
low (0.05 per cent) sulphur diesel was introduced in October 1996. 
History 
Liquidity in both the forward gasoil markets was badly affected by 
the introduction of new rules for. VAT and import duties fr*om 1 
January 1993 as a result of the Single European Act. 
Disagreements between European member states over the 
application of the new rules created confusion and uncertainty for 
traders who faced the possibility that VAT and excise duties could 
be imposed at every stage in a chain of forward contracts, greatly 
increasing the costs and risks of trading. 
Previously, oil movements within the EC were treated as 
imports and VAT was chargeable at the point of consumption, not 
on any preceding paper deal. But the new rules introduced liability 
for VAT and excise duty on every delivery under a forward paper 
contract unless the cargo was destined for export and the seller 
Supplement 4 Mar 1998 Appendix 7.5/page 1

--- Page 388/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
became liable for unpaid taxes and duties. And, while some 
countries such as the UK were willing to allow traders to use a 
loophole in the legislation by specifying an "unknown" destination, 
others were not and the situation became very uncertain. 
Although contracts were modified to include a clause passing 
liability for tax onto the end-user, many companies also insisted on 
letters of credit for up to four times the original value of the cargo 
in order to cover potential liabilities. As a result, smaller companies 
became unwilling to trade as they could not afford the additional 
costs of the revised letters of credit. So far plans to simplify the 
taxation of chain transactions have not been implemented despite 
strong pressure from the European Association of Oil Traders 
(UPEI) and the volume of forward trade remains depressed. These 
additional costs, together with the supply difficulties experienced 
by Russian gasoil traders have effectively killed the forward market 
for Russian gasoil. Forward trading continued for FOD during 1995 
at a greatly reduced level, but this dried up in early 1996 as cold 
weather and refinery problems in the UK left the market short of 
physical supplies. All the activity has now switched to swaps. 
Appendix 7.5lpage 2 Supplement 4 Mar 1998

--- Page 389/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges 
Sally Clubley 
8.1 Introduction
8.1.1 Oil futures markets
8.1.2 Successful and unsuccessful contracts
8.2 The oil futures exchanges
8.2.1 New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex)
8.2.2 International Petroleum Exchange (IPE)
8.2.3 Tokyo Commodity Exchange (Tocom)
8.3 Delivery procedures
8.3.1 Standard delivery
8.3.2 Exchange of futures for physical (EFP)
8.3.3 Exchange of futures for swaps (EFS)
8.3.4 Alternative delivery procedure (ADP)
8.4 Options on oil futures
8.5 Clearing mechanisms
8.5.1 Organisation
8.5.2 Financial guarantees
8.5.3 Margin calls
8.6 Future developments
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 390/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 391/964 ---
8.1 Introduction 
Commodity futures markets have existed for thousands of years. In their current form, commodity markets can be traced back to the corn markets of the Middle Ages when producers (farmers), merchants and end-users would all meet in a speciﬁc place and agree prices using a system similar to the open outcry method used in today’s futures markets. Today, the term commodity has come to cover a much wider variety of products, ranging from the traditional agricultural crops through meat and metals to oil and ﬁnancial instruments. 
Nobody now doubts that oil is a commodity, although the 
idea was strongly resisted by many when the futures markets were ﬁrst mooted. Since the mid-1980s, when futures and price risk management ﬁrst established themselves as an integral part of the industry
, the oil sector has been transformed. Similar 
transformations are now taking place in liberalising the gas and electricity sectors. The traditional isolated producer-reﬁner-retailer supply chain of the integrated oil companies is now a thing of the past. Although integrated companies still exist, they generally operate as a series of separate enterprises under one corporate umbrella. The trading sections of the major oil compa -
nies are now similar in many ways to large independent traders and investment banks, some of which trade oil purely as a deriva-tive product. 
Although some modiﬁcations were necessary to translate the 
instruments offered in other markets to make them attractive to the oil industry
, the introduction of futures trading – and, sub-
sequently, swaps, options and other derivative instruments – has completely changed the way in which oil is priced and looks set to change it still further
. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant difference 
between oil and other commodities remains the reluctance of many state oil producers to become involved. This has begun to change but the oil futures and derivatives markets still tend to be dominated by trading companies, reﬁners and oil consumers. Many of the price risk management instruments now offered depend very heavily on the existence of liquid forward and futures markets and these have developed in tandem with the other changes in the industry. 8.1.1 Oil futures markets 
The ﬁrst of the “modern” commodity markets began trading over 150 years ago. It was at this time that contracts began to be 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.1/page 1

--- Page 392/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
formalised and centred on exchanges which established trading rules and administered dealings. Today’s markets are a direct development of these agricultural markets, which were initially located in London and Chicago. The development of futures markets has been centred on a few major exchanges ever since, although there are also various small, usually specialised, centres elsewhere. Chicago, which has two futures exchanges, is the largest commodity trading centre in the world but has so far been unsuccessful in its attempts to introduce oil or other energy contracts. 
The commodity exchanges that currently trade oil futures 
contracts are: 
• New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex), 
• International Petroleum Exchange of London (IPE), and 
• Tokyo Commodity Exchange (Tocom) 
Of these the Nymex, which introduced the ﬁrst successful oil con-tract, is by far the largest (see Fig. 8.1). The Singapore Interna-tional Monetary Exchange (Simex) – now part of the Singapore Exchange – tried to establish itself as an international energy exchange but has failed to launch a successful oil futures contract of its own. 
In the early days of oil exploration in the US a forward/ 
futures market was established, but this was short-lived and did not survive the oil industry’
s shift of focus from Pennsylvania to million cont racts 45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Nymex WTI Nymex Heating oil Nymex Gasoline IPE  Brent IPE Gasoil 
Source: Nymex & IPE 
Figure 8.1 Futures contract trading volumes, 2001 
8.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 393/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Texas. The development of the industry at this stage did not allow for a futures market to be established. It was not until the mid-1970s when the spot market had developed to a stage where a futures market became a viable proposition that successful con-tracts could be introduced. 
In 1978, Nymex, which was looking for ways to reduce its 
dependency on its ﬂagging potato contract, introduced a heating oil contract and a fuel oil contract, both for delivery in New 
York 
Harbor. Heating oil, as the IPE was to discover a few years later, is an ideal candidate for a futures contract as it meets the requirements of ready standardisation, ﬂuctuating prices and, by this time, many participants. 
The heating oil contract did not have an auspicious start. At 
the end of 1980 it was still trading daily volumes of under 100 contracts and was not taken seriously by the industry in the US, while outside the US its existence was barely even known. Nymex marketed the contract heavily and backed up the campaign with a major education programme. Gradually their efforts paid off and the industry began to accept that there might be some advan-tages to be gained by using the market. The sharp price rises that followed the outbreak of the Iran/Iraq war gave a further boost to industry interest and the contract began to grow steadily
. The 
fuel oil contract, however, never attracted any interest and was abandoned, as have several been since on both Nymex and the IPE. 
The commodity market community in London was not 
deterred by the slow initial growth of the heating oil contract from working to develop their own contract in gasoil, to be intro-duced in 1981. European traders were, despite having been involved to some extent in the development, extremely sceptical about the need for a futures market and the contract, like heating oil, had a slow start. 
Gradually, however, the two contracts saw volumes begin to 
increase. The marketing and education programmes continued, by now with the participation of more futures brokers who began to see the signs of a successful market. 
As more and more traders 
understood the theories of the markets they began to use them. Although it was difﬁcult to ﬁnd the liquidity to do any worth-while hedging in the early months, many traders did run pilot programmes and learnt how the markets worked. 
The volume on both contracts increased steadily over the 
next year or two and both exchanges began to consider introduc-ing new contracts. Nymex introduced its crude oil contract in 1983 and it was this, combined with the collapse in the oil price in early 1986, that encouraged rapid growth, leading to the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.1/page 3

--- Page 394/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-4.00 -3.00 -2.00 -1.00 
Jan l l i
0.00 1.00 2.00 
Feb Mar Apr May Jun Ju Aug Sep Oct Nov $/barreSeptember 11 
terror st attack 
Figure 8.2 Daily price changes for Nymex WTI, 2001 
complete absorption of futures into the daily lives of the oil indus -
try. Over the next 15 years more than 20 different oil and gas contracts were introduced by the 2 exchanges. There are cur-rently only 5 actively traded oil futures contracts (see Fig. 8.1). This may seem a poor success rate but it does in fact exceed the commodity market average. 8.1.2 Successful and unsuccessful contracts 
In order to be successful, a futures contract must be based on a commodity that has: 
• a volatile price, 
• a quality speciﬁcation that can be standardised, 
• a wide range of participants in the market. 
As oil is a commodity with a highly volatile price, most of the con-tracts that have failed have done so because of a failure in the quality speciﬁcation, although some have suffered from a lack of participants. 
Despite extensive consultation between the exchanges and 
the industry before introducing a new product, they have still not managed to get it right very often. This has sometimes been because the part of the industry consulted was too small and unrepresentative or because too much reliance was placed on the opinions of 1 or 2 large companies. 
8.1/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 395/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Price volatility Volatile prices are essential because without them there is no need for people to use futures markets (see Fig. 8.2). The prime function of a futures market is to provide a hedging mechanism for the related industry
. It is easy to plan and budget for a com-
modity which has a stable price or even one with regular sea-sonal ﬂuctuations and there is therefore no reason to hedge. Standard quality speciﬁcation It is not easy to come up with a standard quality speciﬁcation which will attract the whole of one sector of the industry and, although any contract can be used as a reference for other similar products, it is vitally important in the early days of a contract that the speciﬁcation is acceptable to the users. 
The problems can be exacerbated in markets as fragmented 
as, for example, the European gasoline industry
. Until recently, 
each country had its own gasoline speciﬁcation. This is now chang-ing with the increasingly widespread use of standard speciﬁcation gasoline, but means that the IPE has had great difﬁculty in coming up with a universally acceptable gasoline speciﬁcation. 
And the 
chances of a successful gasoline futures contract being introduced in London have diminished with the growth of the over the counter (OTC) swaps market (see Chapter 10). In the US, where much of the gasoline in the New York Harbor area is delivered by a pipeline which has its own speciﬁcation, the design of a futures contract is a little easier (although subsequent changes to gasoline speciﬁca-tions in different states have caused some problems). 
Similarly Brent crude oil is delivered in standard 500,000 
barrel cargoes. The delivery procedure cannot therefore be used on a futures market trading in 1,000 barrel lots. The size of the futures contract cannot be raised to 500,000 barrels because it would preclude too many potential users from participating. 
A 
compromise therefore has to be reached. At ﬁrst the IPE tried having an ARA (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Antwerp) delivery, but Brent is not traded physically in this way so there was no refer-ence price with which the users could compare the futures price and so the contract failed. The use of cash settlement rather than physical delivery solved the problem and enabled the Brent con-tract to become very successful. Range of participants A wide range of participants on both sides of the market is also essential in order to ensure that there is enough interest in the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.1/page 5

--- Page 396/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
price movement, in both directions, and enough liquidity on the 
market. A product for which there are only 1 or 2 suppliers will not have an active free market. 
Futures markets, like any other, can only trade when a 
buyer and seller agree a price: the more players there are on both sides, the more likely such an agreement is. A lack of participants was one of the main reasons for the failure of the IPE’s naphtha contract in 1991/92. Other requirements One other requirement for a new contract is that it should offer something that is not already available elsewhere. 
In the late 1980s there was an attempt to open an exchange 
in Rotterdam, trading gasoil and Brent in competition with vir-tually identical contracts on the IPE. The exchange was not a success, largely because there was no beneﬁt to participants in moving from a liquid London market with a proven track record to an illiquid new market trading in the same time zone. What is a successful contract? Successful contracts can be deﬁned as those which are liquid enough for users to trade the volume they wish to trade at the time of their choosing without moving the price signiﬁcantly
. 
Inevitably a large buy or sell order will move the price to some degree, particularly if it is accompanied by other similar orders, but market users have to be able to trade when they want. 
The overall volumes traded on the market give a good guide 
to how liquid the contract is. However
, the volume is not traded 
evenly through the day on any of the current energy contracts. For example, roughly two thirds of the Nymex WTI volume is done in the ﬁrst and last hours of trading. 
Another important measure of a successful contract is open 
interest, which is published by the exchanges on a daily basis. Open interest is the total number of outstanding bought and sold contracts at the close of each day’
s business. Contracts that are 
“day-traded” (bought and sold within a single trading day) do not contribute to open interest, although they are part of the total trading volume. When a contract expires, open interest repre-sents the number of contracts which will go through to delivery. Open interest is also used as an indicator for technical analysis. A 
fall in open interest on a given day suggests that more con-
tracts were closed out than opened, whereas a rise suggests the opposite. 
8.1/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 397/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
In the case of the Nymex, the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission* (CFTC) also publishes a weekly breakdown of the composition of open interest, which identiﬁes the total long and short positions reported by those commercial and non-commercial traders whose individual open interest position is at least 300 contracts. Commercial traders are deﬁned as compa-nies whose business involves handling the physical commodity, i.e. hedgers, while non-commercial traders are companies whosebusiness is purely ﬁnancial, i.e. speculators. 
Although there are 
grey areas in this breakdown as some companies are difﬁcult to categorise, it still gives a useful picture of the proﬁle of market use. It provides evidence that the overwhelming majority of futures market trading is carried out by industry participants, though it does not indicate whether these companies are hedging or trading speculatively. 
* www.cftc.gov 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.1/page 7

--- Page 398/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 399/964 ---
8.2 The oil futures exchanges 
By the middle of 2001, the 2 major energy futures exchanges – Nymex and IPE – had 7 successful oil and gas contracts out of a total of over 20 that had been tried. Simex – which formerly listed oil futures contracts – merged in 1999 with the Stock Exchange of Singapore to form the Singapore Exchange. Tocom lists three oil futures contracts which are mainly traded by Japanese companies. 
Nymex IPE Tocom 
WTI Gasoil Dubai/Oman 
Heating oil Brent Gasoline 
Unleaded gasoline Natural gas Kerosene 
Natural gas 
8.2.1 New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex) 
The most successful oil futures market is the Nymex,* which pro-vided 3 of the 5 actively traded oil futures contracts in 2001 (see Fig. 8.3). 
The success of the Nymex is largely due to the importance 
of its WTI crude contract which has become an international 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
1984 1994 19981982 1986 1988 1990 1992 1996 2000 million cont racts IPE Nymex 
Source: Nymex & IPE 
Figure 8.3 Oil futures trading volumes, 1982–2001 
* www.nymex.com 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.2/page 1

--- Page 400/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
marker for the world oil industry , although the Nymex also has 
2 other highly successful oil contracts in its heating oil and unleaded gasoline and a successful oil-related natural gas con
-
tract. In addition, the Nymex offers a wide range of price spread contracts, such as the “crack spread” that enables participants to hedge reﬁnery margins with a single transaction. Nymex Light Sweet Crude (WTI) Contract unit: 1,000 barrels (42,000 US gallons)
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per barrel
T
rading months: 30 consecutive months plus 5 long-dated
futures up to 7 years ahead 
Last trading day: 3rd business day prior to 25th calendar day of month preceding the delivery month 
Daily limit:	 $3 per barrel ($6 if previous day settles at limit), except ﬁrst 2 months for which prices can move $15 per barrel. If prices move by $7.50/barrel in either of the ﬁrst 2 months, limits in all months become $7.50/barrel in the direction of the move. 
Standard delivery:	 fob Cushing, Oklahoma 
Nymex’s light sweet crude oil contract is normally called 
WTI after the W
est Texas Intermediate crude delivered as 
standard against it. This traded an average daily volume of around 154,000 contracts during 2000, a small increase over the previous year. Introduced in 1985, the contract had an active start and has continued to grow virtually every year. A trebling of the oil price during 1999 and 2000 followed by sharp falls in 2001 have ensured continued growth in activity in recent years. 
The contract requires delivery to be made by pipeline, fob 
seller
’s facility Cushing, Oklahoma, with special rules for small 
(5,000 barrels or less) deliveries. The delivery system matches the normal physical delivery for WTI very closely: all deliveries are rateable over the course of the month and must be initiated on or after the ﬁrst calendar day and completed by the last cal-endar day of the delivery month. The futures contract ceases trading, or expires, 3 business days before the twenty-ﬁfth cal-endar day of the month before delivery. (This is to allow for pipeline scheduling.) There is provision for other crude oils to be delivered, at seller
’s option, with certain differentials agreed by 
the exchange. At present, the list of alternative grades is conﬁned to 3 North Sea crudes, Brent Blend, Oseberg and Forties, two 
8.2/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 401/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
40,000 35,000 30,000 25,000 20,000 15,000 10,000 
5,000 
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Yr Yr Yr Yr 
Maturity (months) 4 5 6 7 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 8.4 WTI daily average volumes by maturity, 1997 Nigerian crudes, Bonny Light and Qua Iboe, and a Colombian crude, Cusiana. Brent, Forties and Oseberg are currently priced at a discount of $0.30/barrel to WTI, Bonny Light and Cusiana at a premium of $0.15/barrel, and Qua Iboe at a premium of $0.05/barrel. 
WTI trades further forward than any of the other current 
futures contracts (see Fig. 8.4). There are 30 consecutive months traded at any time, plus a further 5 long-dated contracts extend-ing up to 7 years ahead for the 36th, 48th, 60th, 72nd and 84th months. The exchange has also introduced “strip” trading, which allows market users to trade an equal number of crude oil futures contracts for any number of consecutive months from 2 to 30 months in a single transaction. Prices are ﬁxed at a differential to the previous night’
s settlement. As with all commodity futures, 
the activity on the WTI market is concentrated in the nearby months. 
The WTI contract has become, to a large extent, the indus-
try’ 
s world-wide standard price. This is, on the face of it, a little 
surprising as WTI is a low volume US domestic crude and cannot be exported. It is not, therefore, a truly international crude oil. But the US is the largest importer of crude oil in the world and as such its traders, who use WTI as standard, have a very large inﬂuence on international prices. 
There have been times when the differential between the 
price of WTI and those of other crudes has become very distorted, 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.2/page 3

--- Page 402/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
notably during 2 successive summers in the late 1980s and then 
again in 1994. These distortions occurred because of the short -
age of WTI on the US domestic market during the gasoline season. (WTI is a gasoline rich crude oil.) 
After the ﬁrst 2 
squeezes the Nymex amended its rules to allow for the delivery of speciﬁed foreign crudes (at discounts/premiums ﬁxed by the Exchange from time to time). 
Although they caused problems at the time, these episodes 
illustrate how much easier it is for an established contract to endure hiccups than it is for a new one. Had any newly-introduced contract had similar problems it would simply have disappeared, however promptly and effectively action were taken by the relevant exchange. Nymex Number 2 Heating Oil Contract unit: 42,000 US gallons (1,000 barrels)
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per gallon
T
rading months: 18 consecutive months starting with the
next calendar month 
Last trading day: Last business day of the month preceding the delivery month 
Daily limit:	 4 cents/gallon (6c / if previous day settles at 
limit, then 9c / if it settles at 6c /), except the 
ﬁrst 2 months for which prices can move by 40 cents/gallon. If prices move by $0.20/ gallon in either of the ﬁrst 2 months, limits in all months become $0.20/gallon in the direction of the move. 
Standard delivery:	 fob New 
 York Harbor 
Heating oil, which uses the industry pipeline speciﬁcation for delivery in New 
York Harbor as its standard, is the oldest 
energy contract on the Nymex. It traded an average of around 39,000 contracts per day during 2000, up slightly on the previ-ous year. 
Delivery is fob seller’s facility in New York Harbor, ex-shore 
with all duties, entitlements, taxes, fees and other charges paid. The seller
’s shore facility must be capable of delivering into 
barges, but the buyer may request delivery by truck (subject to a surcharge and if available at the seller’s facility). Delivery may also be completed by pipeline, tanker, book transfer or inter- or intra-facility transfer. Deliveries may only be initiated the day after the ﬁfth business day and must be completed before the last business day of the delivery month. 
8.2/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 403/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Nymex Unleaded Gasoline Contract unit: 42,000 US gallons (1,000 barrels) 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per gallon 
T
rading months: 12 consecutive months 
Last trading day: Last business day preceding the delivery 
month 
Daily limit:	 4 cents/gallon (6c / if previous day settles at 
limit then 9c / if it settles at 6c /), except the 
ﬁrst 2 months for which prices can move by 40 cents/gallon. If prices move by $0.20/ gallon in either of the ﬁrst 2 months, limits in all months become $0.20/gallon in the direction of the move. 
Standard delivery:	 fob New 
 York Harbor 
The unleaded gasoline contract replaced the earlier leaded gaso-line contract in the mid-1980s. The 2 ran in parallel for a time and then the older contract was dropped. Unleaded gasoline traded an average daily volume of around 37,000 in 2000, an increase of more than 10 per cent over 1999 as gasoline prices rose sharply on the back of rising crude prices. Like the heating oil contract it uses the industry pipeline speciﬁcation as stan-dard, but there are now problems with determining any stan-dards in the US gasoline market as different states adopt different environmental controls. The delivery rules are the same as the Nymex heating oil contract. 
During 1995, confusion over the introduction of reformu-
lated gasoline (RFG) disrupted the Nymex gasoline contract. Since that time there have been several changes in delivery speciﬁcation and the Nymex contract now generally conforms to industry standards for Phase II complex model reformulated gasoline. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 8.2/page 5

--- Page 404/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Nymex Natural Gas Contract unit: 10,000 MMBtu 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per MMBtu 
T
rading months: 36 consecutive months commencing with the next calendar month plus a long-dated contract initially listed 36 months out 
Last trading day: 3rd business day before the ﬁrst calendar day of the delivery month 
Daily limit:	 $0.30/MMBtu ($0.60 if previous day settles at limit) except the ﬁrst 2 months for which prices can move by $1.50/MMBtu. If prices move by $0.75/MMBtu in either of the ﬁrst 2 months, limits in all months become $1.50/MMBtu in the direction of the move. 
Standard delivery:	 ﬁp Henry Hub, Louisiana 
The fourth successful contract on Nymex is natural gas for deliv-ery at Henry Hub, Louisiana. This contract traded around 71,000 lots per day during 2000 – a small drop on the previous year – and continues to trade actively
. It is primarily a US domestic con-
tract. The contract has become well-established within the US natural gas market, which has embraced commoditisation more willingly than the oil industry did 10 years earlier
. 
Nymex has also had other, regional, natural gas contracts 
with different delivery points, but none of these have made any impact on the industry
. Instead of trading different contracts, the 
gas industry has preferred, like the oil industry, to have one active contract and trade everything else at differentials. 
8.2/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 405/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Nymex Propane Contract unit: 42,000 US gallons (1,000 barrels) 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per gallon 
T
rading months: 15 consecutive months 
Last trading day: Last business day of month preceding the 
delivery month 
Daily limit:	 4 cents/gallon (6c / if previous day settles at 
limit) except ﬁrst 2 months for which prices can move by 40 cents/gallon. If prices move by $0.20/gallon in either of the ﬁrst 2 months, limits in all months become $0.20/ gallon in the direction of the move. 
Standard delivery:	 fob T
 exas Eastern Products Pipeline 
Company, Texas 
There is another contract trading on Nymex, though with limited activity
. It is the propane contract which has been in existence 
for many years and was bought from the New York Cotton Exchange a few years ago. It trades very low volumes. It is unlikely to become a major international contract, though it may eventually become a more useful domestic one. Nymex Brent Crude Contract unit: 1,000 barrels (42,000 US gallons) 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per barrel 
T
rading months: 18 consecutive months 
Last trading day: Business day before the 15th to last calen-
dar day of the month prior to the delivery month 
Daily limit: No daily limit. 
Standard delivery: Cash settlement 
During 2001 the Nymex introduced a Brent crude contract, putting itself in direct competition with the IPE for the ﬁrst time. The contract – which is also based on cash settlement – is virtu-ally identical to the IPE’s Brent contract, although the calcula-tion of the settlement price is slightly different as it uses only Platts price assessments ( see Section 8.3 below ). The settlement 
price is speciﬁcally calculated for the purpose and is based on a mixture of outright deals traded on and hourly price assessments for the forward 15-day Brent market during the New 
York 
trading day on the ﬁnal day of trading for the relevant delivery month. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 8.2/page 7

--- Page 406/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Nymex believes that it can attract trading away from the 
IPE because of the opportunities for cross-margining Brent and WTI spreads traded on the same exchange. Brent-WTI spreads account for a large volume of futures trading and these require full initial margins if traded separately on the Nymex and IPE. But exchanges usually have much smaller initial spread margins and trading the 2 contracts on Nymex would reduce the size of the initial margins required for trading Brent-WTI spreads. In order to encourage trading in the new Brent contract, Nymex has waived all clearing and exchange fees for the ﬁrst year and is offering rebates on WTI spread trades. 
So far volumes have been modest with 49,565 contracts 
traded in 2001 – an average of around 660 per day – following the contract launch on 5 September, just before the 11 Septem-ber terrorist attack on New York which may have dampened interest in the new contract. 
Nymex tried again in 2000 to stimulate interest in a sour 
crude oil contract, this time based on the prices of Middle East Dubai and Oman crudes. It was the ﬁrst cash settlement contract to be traded on the exchange. Instead of physical delivery
, con-
tracts outstanding at expiry were settled at the monthly average price of Dubai and Oman crudes as reported by 6 price reporting agencies. It could only be traded through the Nymex 
Access elec-
tronic trading platform. But trading volumes remained small and the contract was delisted in 2001. 
Nymex also has other energy futures products, including 
a variety of electricity contracts and a coal contract. T 
rading 
in electricity futures began in June 1996, but none of them has had any lasting success. So far, it has not been possible to overcome the problem that the underlying electricity market is broken up into relatively small disconnected regional trans-mission systems, each of which is too small to sustain its own contract. 
Nymex is also planning to introducing a range of new con-
tracts as part of its eNymex system ( see below ). But these will be 
a mixture of swaps and physical contracts, not futures contracts. Nymex spreads The Nymex also offers a number of standardised “price spread” contracts that can be traded as a single transaction, thus reduc-ing brokerage costs and margin calls. The most popular of these is the “crack spread” which enables participants to trade the price 
8.2/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 407/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
differential between the crude and products contracts and so hedge (or speculate over) reﬁnery margins. 
The crack spread is currently traded on the Nymex ﬂoor as 
a combination of heating oil and gasoline contracts traded against an equivalent number of crude oil contracts. It is designed to provide a vehicle for trading the reﬁnery margin. Nymex trades its intermarket spreads in a separate pit from the straightfor-ward contracts. Heating oil, gasoline and crude oil are all traded against each other on a one-for
-one basis and there is also the 
crack spread. The most common combinations are 3 crude: 2 gaso-line + 1 heating oil and 5 crude: 3 gasoline + 2 heating oil. 
Other spreads commonly traded in the oil markets are 
Brent: WTI, gasoil: heating oil, and gasoil: Brent. In all spread trading, one contract is bought and the other sold, in equal quan-tities. (Sometimes traders wish to use unequal quantities in which case they cannot take advantage of beneﬁcial initial margin rates.) Thus for example, a reﬁner wishing to protect reﬁnery margin ahead may buy crude and sell a combination of heating oil and gasoline. Example: hedging reﬁnery margins The gasoline and heating oil element of the reﬁnery margin can be hedged on the futures market using the Nymex crack spread. For example, in the case of a 3:2:1 spread, 3 crude contracts are 
traded against 2 gasoline and 1 heating oil. 
Futures Physical 
Feb Sell June $7.80/barrel 
crack spread 
Mar Buy June $6.96/barrel Buy crude $28.60/barrel 
crack spread Sell gasoline $0.880/gallon 
Sell heating oil $0.786/gallon 
Proﬁt $0.84/barrel Margin $7.04/barrel 
By adding the futures proﬁt to the margin achieved on the physi-cal market, an overall margin of $7.88/barrel is made. This is close to the original futures crack spread level of $7.80/barrel. Hedges are rarely perfect. 
The crack spread is traded as a differential, but after trading 
the component contracts are priced. For example, the original differential of $7.80/barrel could be broken down as WTI: $26.50/barrel, unleaded gasoline: 84 cents/gallon, and heating oil: 77 cents/gallon. It is, however
, only the differential that is 
relevant. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.2/page 9

--- Page 408/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
8.2.2 International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) 
The only exchange to trade nothing but energy contracts is the International Petroleum Exchange† of London which introduced its ﬁrst contract in gasoil in 1981. This was not initially a success, but changes to the contract speciﬁcation in 1985 made it more attractive to participants. The other successful oil futures con-tract on the IPE is the Brent crude contract, which also required several changes to its speciﬁcations before it took off. In addition, the IPE has tried a Dubai crude contract, a heavy fuel oil con-tract, a naphtha contract and a gasoline contract, but all have failed. Unlike the Nymex with its WTI contract, the IPE chose cash settlement rather than physical delivery for its Brent crude contract, although there is a physical delivery option. The IPE also has a successful natural gas futures contract which was launched in January 1997. IPE Gasoil Contract unit: 100 tonnes 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per tonne 
Trading months: 12 consecutive months then quarterly up to 24 months forward then half-yearly to 36 months 
Last trading day: 2 business days before the 14th of the deliv-ery month 
Daily limit: No daily limit imposed by IPE 
Standard delivery: fob ARA, Vlissingen or Ghent 
The gasoil contract, which requires standard delivery of German DIN grade gasoil with 1 or 2 small changes in speciﬁcation, traded an average daily volume of around 28,000 during 2000, an increase of 16 per cent compared with the previous year
. The 
pricing standard is fob ARA (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Antwerp) and the lot size is 100 metric tons. The delivery options include Vlissingen and Ghent. Gasoil is now traded up to 36 months forward. Deliveries must be made between the 16th and the last calendar day of the delivery month. 
When the contract was ﬁrst introduced the delivery system 
was a somewhat complicated warrant system. In retrospect it is a little surprising that the contract enjoyed any success as the 
† www.ipe.uk.com, www.ipemarkets.com 
8.2/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 409/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
delivery was so far away from the industry norm. It may demon-strate the luck of timing in the introduction of a new contract; others introduced since have failed on less signiﬁcant problems. The standard fob delivery
, introduced a few years later, was wel-
comed by the industry. IPE Brent Crude Contract unit: 1,000 barrels 
Price quotation: US dollars and cents per barrel 
Trading months: 12 consecutive months then quarterly up to 24 months then half-yearly up to 36 months 
Last trading day: Last business day before the 15th of the month preceding the delivery month 
Daily limit: No daily limit imposed by IPE 
Standard delivery: Cash settlement or EFP (Exchange of 
future for physical) 
The IPE’s Brent contract – which now trades for up to 36 months ahead – has also become very successful, though in this case at the third attempt. Brent’
s cumbersome physical delivery proce-
dures ( see Chapter 7 ) are unsuitable for a futures contract and 
the IPE ﬁnally settled on a cash settlement contract instead of the more common physical delivery
, although there is also pro-
vision for physical delivery of whole cargoes using the EFP mechanism. 
Cash settlement simply means that contracts left open at 
expiry are settled by cash transfer instead of the physical trans-fer of crude oil. Anyone with an open hedge position should there-fore be in a position to buy or sell physical Brent at the cash settlement price, which is derived from physical transactions during the day
, so the hedge provides as good a protection against 
adverse price movement as a physical delivery contract. Traders with full-cargo sized positions can use the EFP mechanism to effect physical delivery. 
Brent traded an average of around 67,000 contracts per day 
during 2000, a slight decline on the previous year
. Like WTI, the 
contract is for 1,000 barrels. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.2/page 11

--- Page 410/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
IPE Natural Gas National Balancing Point (NBP) 
Contract unit: 1,000 therms of natural gas per day for con -
tract duration (minimum of 5 lots) 
Price quotation: UK sterling, pence per therm 
T
rading months: Monthly contract: up to 15 months forward, 
then quarterly to 36 months Balance of month contract: strip of daily 
contracts for the balance of the current month Daily contract: daily contract for up to 7 
days from the day ahead 
Last trading day: 
Monthly contract: 2 business days before 
the ﬁrst calendar day of the delivery month Balance of month contract: 2 business days 
prior to the penultimate calendar day of the delivery month Daily contract: 1600 hours on business day 
prior to delivery Daily limit: No daily limit imposed by IPE 
Standard delivery: T
ransfer of rights at the NBP 
The IPE launched a UK natural gas contract in 1997. The con-tract, which is based on the transfer of natural gas rights at the National Balancing Point (NBP) – a notional point where the bal-ancing of gas within the UK National Transmission System (NTS) occurs, trades daily contracts of 1,000 therms per day for delivery either for groups of calendar month days (28, 29, 30 or 31 days) up to 36 months forward, or for the number of days remaining for the balance of the delivery month after the expiry date of the contract, or for individual days up to 7 days ahead. T
rades must take place in multiples of 5 contracts per day. Deliv-
ery must be made daily no later than 18:30 on the day prior to the delivery day via T
ransco’s AT link system. EFPs may take 
place at any time up to 30 minutes after the cessation of the con-tract. So far, the IPE’s natural gas contract has been well received by the industry and the number of participants and the level of open interest are both rising. The natural gas contract traded an average volume of just over 2,000 lots per day during 2000, an increase of 71 per cent over the previous year
. 
The IPE natural gas contract was the ﬁrst energy contract 
to be traded entirely electronically
. Orders are entered through 
terminals operating what is, in effect, an electronic pit system. Terminals are held by both IPE members and a special category of trade membership that allows gas traders to belong to the 
8.2/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 411/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
market and trade directly. All contracts must be cleared through an IPE clearing member. The IPE recently extended its electronic trading system to include both Brent and gasoil for a limited period before the start of the normal pit trading day. 8.2.3 Tokyo Commodity Exchange (Tocom) 
The Tokyo Commodity Exchange† (Tocom) trades crude oil, gaso-line and kerosene. All three contracts have a lot size of 100 kilo-litres, or around 630 barrels and prices are quoted in Japanese yen per kilolitre. 
Both product contracts involve physical delivery and are 
based on standard Japanese domestic product speciﬁcations. The crude oil contract is cash settlement only and is based on the average price of Dubai and Oman as reported by 6 price report-ing agencies. It was introduced in September 2001 and has had a very promising start, averaging around 1
1,000 contracts per 
day in the last 4 months of the year. 
Futures trading is largely by domestic Japanese companies. 
Gasoline volumes are good, averaging around 65,000 contracts per day during 2001. The kerosene contract traded about half that volume. 
†www.tocom.or.jp 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.2/page 13

--- Page 412/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 413/964 ---
8.3 Delivery procedures 
The vast majority of futures contracts are never delivered (see Table 8.1). Instead, most participants prefer to close out (or roll over) their positions well before the last day of trading for each delivery month. This is because futures contracts are either traded in conjunction with a position in the physical market to protect against an adverse price movement, or used in a speculative fashion to beneﬁt from a favourable one – neither of which requires delivery of the physical commodity underlying the contract. 
Nevertheless, physical delivery remains an important part 
of the operation of the futures market since it ensures that the futures prices remain anchored to the underlying physical market and arbitrage dictates that participants will always take (or make) delivery when it pays them to do so. 
Although cash-
settled contracts do not involve physical delivery, the same rules apply and participants will take advantage of arbitrage opportu-nities between the contract and the cash settlement price in the same way
. 
In addition to physical delivery of the standardised com-
modity speciﬁed in the futures contract (or its cash equivalent), participants may also employ 1 of 3 other possible delivery mechanisms. These include: 
• exchange of futures for physical (EFP), 
• exchange of futures for swaps* (EFS), 
• alternative delivery procedure (ADP). 
Table 8.1 Nymex crude oil deliveries, 2000 
Volume traded Standard delivery ADP EFP 
January 3,423,387 0 399 57,553 
February 2,615,920 0 466 70,244 
March 3,053,238 0 1,167 44,683 
April 2,824,373 342 646 50,044 
May 2,878,375 0 607 66,701 
June 3,613,338 0 426 37,843 
July 2,947,528 0 947 52,125 
August 2,850,730 0 21 51,743 
September 3,905,950 0 528 37,681 
October 2,855,157 0 477 53,058 
November 3,110,651 0 12 49,231 
December 4,728,734 76 2,202 47,097 
* IPE and Nymex Brent contract only. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.3/page 1

--- Page 414/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
These delivery procedures and their variations are designed to 
make the contracts as ﬂexible as possible and therefore to encourage the industry’s use of the exchanges. The EFP proce
-
dure is particularly useful, but ADPs also have an important part to play
. 
8.3.1 Standard delivery 
In normal circumstances the exchanges match the outstanding buyers and sellers when a contract ceases trading. The brokers are informed of each other
’s identity and the delivery procedure 
proceeds according to the rules on the different exchanges. These rules vary from contract to contract but are, with the exception of cash-settled contracts such as Brent, similar and reﬂect the operation of the physical market. In all delivery rules the terms buyer and seller refer to the clearing member of the market, usually the broker. Nymex reﬁned products Heating oil and gasoline on Nymex have the same delivery pro-cedures. Both product contracts cease trading on the last busi-ness day of the month preceding delivery. On the ﬁrst day of the delivery month the seller must notify the exchange of the loca-tion from which he will be delivering. Buyers and sellers are noti-ﬁed of each other’s identity 2 days after trading ceases. The buyer then has 48 hours in which to choose a method of delivery and nominate a preferred 5 day delivery range. T
wo days before deliv-
ery takes place, the buyer has to lodge the full value of the deliv-ery with his broker: the seller is paid in full the business day following delivery
. There are additional margin requirements for 
both buyer and seller once trading has ceased. 
All deliveries must take place after the ﬁfth business day of 
the month and be completed before the last business day
. If the 
seller is not able to meet the buyer’s preference because of logis-tical problems at the terminal he may refuse it, but must accept the next nomination, which must be entirely outside the ﬁrst. The seller cannot refuse for any other reason. 
Deliveries are made into barge or truck, by pipeline, tanker, 
book transfer or inter
- or intra-facility transfer at buyer’s option, 
but there is a small surcharge for truck deliveries. Inspection costs are shared by buyer and seller, though the seller has to bear all the quality inspection costs if the product is outside the speciﬁcation. 
8.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 415/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Nymex crude The Nymex light sweet crude oil contract is different from the product contracts, reﬂecting differences in physical trading. The light sweet crude contract (commonly known as WTI, but the con-tract also allows for physical delivery of speciﬁc domestic and foreign grades) ceases trading 3 business days before the 25th calendar day of the month before delivery
. 
On the last trading day the seller notiﬁes the exchange of 
the pipeline at Cushing, Oklahoma which he will use to make delivery
. Two business days after the last trading day, buyer and 
seller will be notiﬁed of each other’s identity. The following busi-ness day the buyer will notify the seller where he will take the crude. (The costs of pumping crude from one pipeline or facility to another are for the buyer
’s account.) The seller is then able to 
put in a scheduling notice to the facility not later than the last business day of the month. 
The buyer must lodge the full value of the delivery with the 
exchange 3 days after the last trading day 
. Payment to the seller 
is made on the 20th calendar day of the month after the delivery month. This can be done by T-bills or letter of credit. There is also an additional margin requirement for both buyer and seller once trading has ceased. 
Unlike the products, either buyer or seller may appoint an 
inspector
. Anyone who chooses to do so must bear the full cost of 
the inspection. 
The Nymex Brent crude contract is cash settlement only. The 
Brent contract ceases trading on the last business day before the 15th to last calendar day of the month prior to the delivery month – this is consistent with the operation of the forward 15-day Brentmarket on which the contract is based ( see Chapter 7 ). 
The settlement price for the Nymex Brent contract is 
calculated for the exchange by Platts . The index is an average 
of 3 components: the weighted average of all reported cash deals in the ﬁrst month of the 15-day Brent contract; the weighted average of a ﬁrst month value calculated by taking the second month deals adjusted by the average of the spread value between the ﬁrst and second month and, thirdly
, the 
average of hourly price indications of the 15-day Brent market. All the elements are based on Brent activity during the Exchange trading day. 
Platts and Nymex publish this index throughout the expira-
tion day and the ﬁnal value, published after 4:00pm on expira-tion day, is used to settle all outstanding Brent contracts on expiry
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.3/page 3

--- Page 416/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
IPE reﬁned products 
Gasoil ceases trading at 12.00 noon 2 business days before the 14th calendar day of the delivery month. On this day all sellers must notify the clearing house of the location of the product by 
14.00 hours. As soon as possible after this time the clearing house matches buyers and sellers and notiﬁes them. 
The buyer must nominate a preferred 5 day delivery 
range the following morning by 10.00. 
As with Nymex, the seller 
can only refuse by proving congestion at the loading terminal. If refusing, he must do so by 12.00. The buyer must then give 48 hours notice of the arrival of the barge. (Inter- and intra-facility and pipeline transfers are also possible, as is loading into another type of vessel if the seller’s facility permits. Deliveries at Vlissingen are discounted by $0.50 per tonne.) All deliveries must take place between the 16th and the last day of the delivery month. 
The buyer, who chooses the inspector, and seller, who has 
some rights to refuse, share the costs of inspection unless the product fails to meet the speciﬁcation in which case the seller must pay
. 
The seller must lodge all the documents relating to the deliv-
ery with the clearing house within 4 days of the delivery being completed. The buyer has to make payment the following busi-ness day by 12.00 noon. IPE crude The IPE’s Brent contract has no real delivery procedure as the contract is for cash settlement, although physical delivery is pos-sible under the EFP rules. Trading ceases at the close of business of the last business day before the 15th day before the ﬁrst day of the delivery month. W
ithin 2 business days, all contracts are 
settled against the Brent index price for the last trading day. The Brent index is published daily and is a weighted average of all the Brent deals done for the prompt futures month the previous day. The IPE uses all available published sources to calculate the number and there are speciﬁed procedures for dealing with any day where no cargoes are traded. 
The Brent index is the weighted average of all the conﬁrmed 
15-day Brent market deals for the appropriate delivery month as reported by various media sources, including all the major telex and screen-based price reporting services. The index is issued at noon each day based on the deals done during the previous day
. 
8.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 417/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
If there are not enough actual outright trades reported by 
the media, the Brent index is the average of the conﬁrmed deals (as above) and 2 other ﬁgures: 
1.	The weighted average of the second month 15-day 
Brent deals reported by the media plus or minus the average differential between the ﬁrst and second months as given in reports of spreads traded. 
For example, if June is the month for which the 
index is being assessed, the IPE would take the weighted average of reported July deals and add (if July was trading at a discount to June) or subtract (if July was trading at a premium) the weighted average of reported June/July spreads. Thus, if the weighted average July price was $26.40 and the average June/ July spread was June + $0.20, the price used in calcu-
lating the Brent index would be $26.20. 
2.	A straight average of all the media assessments made during the day
. 
All the relevant media sources publish price 
assessments for the Brent market, either throughout the day in the case of the electronic media or at the end of the day in the case of the telex/fax services. 
All 
these assessments are averaged. 
8.3.2 Exchange of futures for physical (EFP) 
EFPs involve the exchange of a futures position for a physical one. Thus the buyer of oil can “give” a long futures position to the seller and receive oil in exchange. Buyer and seller can both establish futures positions in their own time, at prices unknown to each other
. When the physical transaction is agreed or the 
delivery takes place an EFP is registered on the exchange giving each side a closing futures position. The price at which this is done is the same price as that on which the physical transaction is invoiced. In addition, there will normally be a price differen-tial agreed for the physical side of the transaction reﬂecting quality and locational differences. 
Under the exchange rules all EFPs have to be supported by 
a physical transaction and the exchange can ask to see evidence of the physical transfer
. Under the IPE rules, and those for the 
Nymex Brent crude contract, the physical transfer can be a swap. Swaps are covered in detail elsewhere ( see Chapter 10 ) but essen-
tially involve a trader ﬁxing an unknown ﬂoating price in the future for a ﬁxed price now and reversing the transactions at a 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 8.3/page 5

--- Page 418/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
later date. It works in a similar way to a futures hedge, but using 
published prices rather than exchange ones: the swap is reversed at the time the physical transaction takes place so the trader has effectively ﬁxed his price in advance. 
EFPs are used extensively on all energy futures markets. As 
Table 8.1 shows, virtually all the deliveries made into the Nymex WTI contract are EFPs. In the past, term contracts, where the buyer agreed to take a certain volume of oil each month, for example, on both products and crude were common. When prices became very volatile at the beginning of the 1980s these agree-ments tended to die out as neither side was prepared to commit itself, even at market-related prices. The use of EFPs, however
, 
enables such long term deals to be struck and, in theory at least, each side can then price when the time is right. In this way supply has been separated from price: a buyer can be sure he will have the oil required without having to commit on price. 
EFPs are also useful when, for example, a seller wishes to 
dispose of a cargo physically but wishes to keep open the pos-sibility of a higher price. Normally an EFP will be registered at a date close to the date of delivery or on the day the deal is agreed and the reference price will be the closest futures equiva-lent to the physical deal: for example a June Brent EFP would be based on a June Brent quote. There are occasions, however
, 
when EFPs continue pricing many months after the cargo has physically changed hands. This can make accounting difﬁcult, but means that a cargo can be sold today, for example, at next year’s prices. 
Care must be taken when trading EFPs that arrangements 
have been made for dealing with the volume tolerance on the physical deal – normally the EFP 
will be for the exact volume 
delivered if this quantity is known or for the theoretical amount traded if the EFP is registered earlier. Adjustments for tolerance then have to be made later. Similarly any differential, or the basis for calculating it, between the product or crude traded and the futures price must be agreed. EFPs must be registered within 1 hour of the expiry of the relevant futures contract in London, though on Nymex they can be registered until noon on the day following the end of trading. 
Technically, EFPs are considered to be a method of delivery. 
They do require delivery of oil, but the delivery is not performed under the rules of the exchange and, although the performance of the futures contracts is guaranteed by the exchange, the deliv-ery of the physical oil is not guaranteed. Counterparty risk is therefore the same as in any other trade agreed between 2 parties. 
8.3/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 419/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
Example: exchange of futures for physical (EFP) Company A agrees to sell Company B 500,000 barrels of Bonny Light crude to be priced using an EFP 
based on June Brent plus 
a premium of 50 cents/barrel. The EFP is to be registered either on the date of the bill of lading or on 10 May, whichever is the sooner, at the closing price of the previous trading day. 
Company A has to build up a short position of 500 IPE Brent 
contracts and Company B has to build up an equivalent long posi-tion. Assuming that they have both done this by 10 May and that the EFP 
is registered on that date, the net buying and selling 
price for each company is determined as follows: 
Seller: Company A Buyer: Company B 
Sells futures at: $27.45 EFP 
registered at: $27.25 
Proﬁt on futures: $ 0.20 Invoices B at: $27.75* Futures proﬁt: 
$ 0.20 
Net selling price: $27.95 Buys futures at: $27.10 
EFP 
registered at: $27.25 
Proﬁt on futures: $ 0.15 
Invoice from A: $27.75* 
Futures proﬁt: 
$ 0.15 
Net buying price: $27.60 
* EFP registration price plus 50 cents/barrel premium as agreed 
Both parties thus have a net price equal to their original 
futures price plus the 50 cents/barrel premium agreed. The EFP registration price is not relevant to the end result, but a ﬁgure must be assigned to it in order to close out the futures positions. 8.3.3 Exchange of futures for swaps (EFS) 
An exchange of futures for swaps (EFS) is virtually identical to an EFP
. Instead of exchanging the futures position for a physi-
cal position it is exchanged for a swap. In many cases a swap can provide a closer hedge than the futures market and this mecha-nism enables a hedger to convert a hedge from one type of price risk management instrument to another
. Many product sales are 
made on an average Platt’s price over a month and a swap can 
therefore give a more exact match than a futures hedge. The futures exchange can ask for evidence of a properly documented swap deal if an EFS is reported, just as it can for a physical deal if an EFP is reported. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.3/page 7

--- Page 420/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Example: exchange of futures for swaps (EFS) 
In this case, Company B has sold July gasoil futures in April at an average price of $200/tonne in order to hedge unsold product in stock in case prices should fall. In early May, B sells the physical product priced at the average of Platt’s NW Europe cif 
gasoil quotations for the month of July plus a quality premium of $3/tonne. B therefore decides that a swap would provide a better hedging instrument because it can be matched more exactly to the underlying reference price agreed for the physical sale. 
Under the terms of the swap, B agrees to sell at a ﬁxed price 
of $195/tonne and the swap is then reversed at a ﬂoating price calculated from the average of the mean of Platt’s cif NWE gasoil 
quotations for the whole of July. The contract is settled by dif-ference, so B either pays the swap provider if the average is greater than $195/tonne or receives the difference if it is lower
. 
In order to close out the existing futures position, the EFS is then registered on the ﬂoor of the exchange at $195/tonne, the ﬁxed price agreed in the swap, which leaves B with a net proﬁt on the EFS of $5/tonne. 
April Futures sold at: $200 
May EFS registered at: $195 Net proﬁt on futures: $5 
May Fixed price on swap: 
 $195 
July Swap reversed at: $182 Net proﬁt on swap: $13 
July Sale of physical oil: $185* 
* including $3/tonne quality premium 
Net price received by Company B = ($182 + $3) + $5 + $13 = $203 
In July, the average Platt’ s cif NWE gasoil price is 
$182/tonne and the swap is reversed at this level. B therefore receives a payment of $13/tonne from the swap provider to make up his ﬁxed selling price of $195/tonne. In addition, B receives a payment of $185/tonne ($182/tonne plus the agreed $3/tonne quality premium) from the company that purchased the physical gasoil. As a result, the total price received by B for its gasoil is $203/tonne, which is the price paid by the buyer plus the futures proﬁt plus the swap proﬁt. 
Had the market moved up instead of down, Company B 
would have made a loss on the futures market and the swap, but would have received a higher price from its physical customer
. 
With both EFPs and EFSs, the registration of the EFP or 
EFS can close out or create a futures position for either party
. As 
8.3/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 421/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
soon as an EFP/EFS is registered any futures contracts that are created are treated in the normal way and become subject to margin calls. They must be closed out by the time the contract expires or they will be included in the normal delivery process. 8.3.4 Alternative delivery procedure (ADP) 
In addition to the normal exchange delivery procedures and the EFP 
mechanism, all the futures contracts allow for an Alterna-
tive Delivery Procedure or ADP. This allows delivery to take place between a buyer and seller matched up by the exchange, but in a different manner from that prescribed in the rules. The differ-ences could be in location, quality or any other term, but it must be agreed between buyer and seller
. 
One common example of an ADP is the delivery of non-EU 
qualiﬁed material under the IPE gasoil contract. If buyer and seller agree to the delivery of such product, the exchange is noti-ﬁed that an ADP will take place. In this case, the IPE no longer guarantees delivery and the contract becomes like any other deal concluded directly between 2 principals. The gasoil futures posi-tions are closed out at the settlement price on the day before the contract expires. 
Any discount or premium relating to the new 
delivery terms is negotiated directly between the 2 parties involved. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.3/page 9

--- Page 422/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 423/964 ---
8.4 Options on oil futures 
Both Nymex and the IPE have, in addition to their futures con-tracts, a number of options contracts ( see Chapter 9 ). At 
 present 
these are available for the 4 most successful US oil and gas futures contracts, WTI, heating oil, gasoline and natural gas, for Brent and gasoil on the IPE and for the new Nymex Brent and Brent/WTI spread contracts. The Nymex also offers a “crack spread” option based on a ratio of one heating oil contract to one light sweet crude contract. Options offer a number of greater trading opportunities to the industry and others and increase pricing ﬂexibility. Exchange options, however, ﬁnd it difﬁcult to compete with average price OTC options, which often give more appropriate cover at a lower price. 
Nymex IPE Tocom 
WTI Gasoil none 
Heating oil Brent 
Unleaded gasoline Natural gas Brent Crack spread Brent/WTI spread 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Share of underlying futures 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 8.5 Nymex energy options as share of futures, 1987–99 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.4/page 1

--- Page 424/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
All the exchange option contracts currently available are 
options on futures: this means that on exercise the buyer will receive futures contracts. All option contracts, which are avail
-
able in the same contract months as the underlying futures con-tracts, expire a few days before the futures to enable buyers who exercise to get out of their positions. 
The success of an options contract is normally measured as 
a proportion of the underlying futures contract (see Fig. 8.5). Brent options averaged just over 3 per cent of the underlying futures contracts in 1999, slightly more than the previous year
. 
In absolute terms, the volume of options trading rose by almost 50 per cent, to an average of just under 2,000 contracts per day. Nymex’s WTI contract saw options trading at over 22 per cent of the underlying futures contracts in 1999, an average of 32,388 contracts per day. 
Product options on both the IPE and Nymex have not so far 
been as active as the comparable crude oil contracts and there has been little discernible growth in recent years. Nymex heating oil and gasoline options traded an average of 2,760 and 2,381 con-tracts per day respectively in 1999, representing around 7 per cent of the underlying futures contracts. IPE gasoil options only traded an average of 414 contracts per day in 1999, less than 2 per cent of the underlying futures contracts. 
Nymex introduced a crack spread option contract in Novem-
ber 1994. These options are for either heating oil/crude or gaso-line/crude, but neither has seen very active trading. It is the ﬁrst spread option traded on the oil futures exchanges and is a logical extension of the market, but has not yet attracted much interest. 
8.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 425/964 ---
8.5 Clearing mechanisms 
8.5.1 Organisation 
In most respects the 2 energy futures exchanges are very similar. There are minor differences in the way in which the exchanges operate and in the rules for delivery
, but the overall principles 
are the same. One signiﬁcant difference in the ways the ﬂoor operates is that in London a broker can be buyer and seller of the same lot(s) on the ﬂoor of the exchange but on Nymex that is not allowed except under certain conditions. 
Traditionally, futures markets were membership organisa-
tions but this has now changed for the IPE and Nymex. Both exchanges have de-mutualised and the IPE has now been taken over by the Inter
-continental Exchange* (ICE), an industry-
backed electronic trading platform ( see Chapter 11 ). Demutuali-
sation has had little apparent effect on the day-to-day operations of the two exchanges – the former members remain actively involved in the markets as clearing and ﬂoor brokers and con-tinue to operate in the same way. Both exchanges are managed by executives reporting to boards elected by the shareholders. But the IPE faces a major change following its takeover by ICE, which plans to close the trading ﬂoor and switch entirely to elec-tronic trading. 8.5.2 Financial guarantees 
The ﬁnancial performance of all futures contracts is guaranteed by the clearing houses of the exchanges. This guarantee techni-cally applies to the clearing member of the market: any company trading through a clearing member theoretically has normal counterparty risk so it is important to know the ﬁnancial stand-ing of the broker. In practice, the clearing houses have always honoured their members’ 
client contracts. 
The clearing house in London is the London Clearing House 
(LCH), a body jointly owned by a number of major UK exchanges with their members and shareholders. On Nymex the clearing is done through a mutual corporation of the exchange clearing members, who all have to put up funds to trade. Positions are limited by the funds deposited. The clearing houses on all the energy exchanges have weathered some problems over the years 
* www.intercontinentalexchange.com, www.intcx.com 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.5/page 1

--- Page 426/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
in which energy contracts have traded, but have always managed 
to fulﬁl their guarantees – in some cases by entering the physi -
cal market to buy oil to meet delivery obligations. 8.5.3 Margin calls 
In order to maintain this ﬁnancial guarantee the clearing houses require an initial margin, or deposit, to be paid against each futures contract traded, whether bought or sold. This margin is payable when the contract is traded and is returned when the position is closed. It is intended to protect the clearing house against 2 days’ 
price movements and can be varied with no notice 
when conditions change. Normally, the initial margin is around $2,000–3,500 per contract ($2.50–3.50 per barrel) on Nymex and $1,500–2,500 per contract ($1.50–2.00 per barrel on crude, $15–25 per tonne on products) on the IPE. In volatile market con-ditions, this margin is frequently increased. It is also raised as the contract nears the end of trading. 
In addition, a variation margin is payable each day. This rep-
resents the difference in value between the contract when it was bought or sold and the current market value. It is calculated daily against the end of day settlement price and payable in full the following day
. Thus if a trader buys a Brent contract at $25 per 
barrel and the market settles at $24.50, $0.50 per barrel or $500 is payable. If it settles at $25.50 the buyer will receive $500. 
8.5/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 427/964 ---
8.6 Future developments 
The physical oil market operates 24 hours a day and although volumes of business done vary with the overlap between the working hours of Europe and the US being the most active, there is plenty of business done at other times. In an effort to meet the needs of the industry more fully all the exchanges have devel-oped various ways of increasing market hours. 
There are 3 main ways in which this can be done: the 
exchanges can be open for longer hours, the same contracts can be traded on different exchanges in different time zones or the current exchange practices can be supplemented with electronic trading. 
Nymex chose the electronic route and has now been operat-
ing its Access system since June 1993. The system is available virtually all the time the markets are shut, between Sunday evening and Friday afternoon New 
York time. Nymex claims that 
it is not intended, however successful it becomes, to replace the market ﬂoor, though many in industry feel that there is a threat to the traditional marketplace. Theoretically a more perfect market would exist on the screen and participants may be willing to exchange the beneﬁts of that for the traditional open outcry trading pits. In developing its Brent contract, Nymex consulted with a wide range of crude oil traders and found that the open outcry pit system remained a popular way of trading. It was for this reason, amongst others, that the exchange decided to trade Brent on the ﬂoor and not through Access. 
The IPE has also introduced an electronic trading system 
(ETS) for its natural gas contract and recently extended this to its other oil futures contracts, Brent and gasoil, for a limited period before the start of the normal pit trading day
. The IPE 
also had an agreement with the Singapore International Monetary Exchange (Simex) to trade its Brent contract during the Singapore trading day, but this failed to generate any real business. 
Other commodities have tried other approaches. Some of the 
US ﬁnancial markets open for 2 or 3 sessions during each 24 hour day
, hoping to catch business from each of the major time zones. 
But the heavy costs of such operations are not often recovered by the volume of business done. Although the start-up costs of the electronic systems are high the ongoing costs should be lower. 
Electronic trading platforms have developed in large 
numbers in the energy industry over the last few years ( see 
Chapter 1 
1). They take various forms, but most trade physical 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.6/page 1

--- Page 428/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
contracts and swaps. Oil futures contracts are still only traded 
out of the normal exchange hours on Nymex’s Access and the IPE’s ETS, although the IPE is planning to move oil futures trading to a new electronic platform following the takeover by the Inter-continental Exchange (ICE). 
There is still widespread support within the oil industry for 
the pit trading system, but there are also many traders who feel that electronic trading is inevitable, if not entirely desirable. Cer-tainly, within the emerging gas and electricity trading commu-nities electronic trading is playing a very large part. The main disadvantage, in many eyes, is the lack of “market feel”. 
Although 
many of the systems include a list of potential bids and offers below and above the current best bid/offer prices, this does not – they say – give the same indication as the trading ﬂoor. 
It is also likely that the participation of locals would fall in 
an electronic market. Locals are those who trade the ﬂoor of the market for their own account (although some also take client orders). They trade speculatively in and out of the market several times a day
, taking small proﬁts. By doing this they add signiﬁ-
cantly to market liquidity. Locals are much more prevalent in New 
York than in London. 
While screen trading is supplementary to ﬂoor trading this 
is probably not too much of a disadvantage: liquidity is not expected to be as high as on the market ﬂoor
. Should electronic 
trading take over from the ﬂoor, however, it could become a problem. There is nothing to stop locals screen trading, but, relying as they do on small changes in sentiment in the market, there are unlikely to be as many. The working conditions would also be very different, and while many of those who have seen the Nymex trading ﬂoor cannot conceive of working there, many locals feel similarly about sitting in front of a screen. A new type of local would therefore need to develop. 
One major advantage for the users of the market is that costs 
would be signiﬁcantly reduced if screen trading were to take over completely from the ﬂoor
. Brokers’ overheads would be sharply 
reduced and many larger users would probably become members of the market entitling them to their own link to the market. Many of the biggest users are already members but electronic trading would make membership more attractive to others. 
Electronic trading platforms also make it possible to auto-
mate credit control, scheduling and invoicing as well as trade matching and clearing. This not only cuts costs but also reduces the chances for errors in the transmission of information within and between organisations, and speeds up the process. But these advantages are not conﬁned to futures trading – any electronic 
8.6/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 429/964 ---
8 Oil futures exchanges
platform that can combine physical trading, futures contracts and OTC instruments could have a major impact on the market. 
Until recently there was a degree of co-operation between 
the two energy exchanges, Nymex and the IPE. But this has now changed with Nymex introducing a Brent contract in direct com-petition with the IPE and developing their electronic trading system, enymex, to compete with the most popular electronic platform operated by ICE, the new owners of the IPE. 
There is also likely to be an increased blurring of the lines 
between the different price risk management instruments. 
At 
present, futures and options on futures are cleared and margined while other OTC instruments are not. Clearing allows purchases and sales to be closed out automatically and substitutes the clear-ing house as a party to all contracts thus eliminating counter-party risk. Enymex plans to introduce clearing for all of the instruments it lists and it seems likely that ICE will provide a similar system. ICE trades a wide range of outright and differ-ential swaps in the oil market, as well as various other energy products and metals but does not yet offer any clearing services. ICE is owned by several large energy trading companies and investment banks and is the ﬁrst multi-counterpart electronic trading system to make inroads into the oil industry
. 
It is possible that one dominant oil trading system or 
exchange will emerge in the future as liquidity migrates to the cheapest and most effective trading environment, but it is still far too early to say which one it will be – Nymex, ICE/IPE or some new entrant. 
As far as the futures markets are concerned 
the key requirements are liquidity and ﬁnancial credibility. 
Despite the high failure rate of new contracts, there are 
likely to be several introduced in the next few years. Some of these will be futures contracts and some option contracts. 
At 
present, both Nymex and the IPE are looking towards the liber-alising gas and electricity markets for new contracts, as well as the new areas of emissions and telecommunications bandwidth. W
ith the advent of electronic trading it is much easier and 
cheaper to introduce new contracts. 
Other new contracts may include more reﬁned product con-
tracts in an attempt to provide a better spread of contracts to meet all industry requirements. V
arious reﬁned product con-
tracts have been tried without success in the past, but they are obvious holes in the current market coverage and so will doubt-less be tried again. 
There is a danger that in introducing too many contracts the 
liquidity of all markets will be reduced. Each successful market brings in its own range of participants, but may also take 
Supplement 8 May 2002 8.6/page 3

--- Page 430/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
business from existing markets which have been used as the best 
available hedging instrument. It is not necessary for every product to have its own contract, but it is desirable that every
-
one in the oil industry can ﬁnd a product which has some statis-tically proven relationship with the product in which they are interested. 
When the ﬁrst of the “Wall Street reﬁners”, as the US invest-
ment banks were known, arrived on the market in the late 1980s the futures markets saw these companies as something of a threat because they appeared to be trying to take much of the business off the exchange ﬂoors to be done over the counter
. In 
fact, they are only able to offer their highly speciﬁc instruments to their clients because liquid future markets exist in which they can lay off their risk. 
8.6/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 431/964 ---
9 Options 
David Knox 
9.1 Introduction
9.2 What is an option?
9.2.1 Options contracts
9.2.2 Types of option
9.2.3 Option trading positions
9.2.4 Synthetic contracts
9.3 Using options
9.3.1 Producer hedge
9.3.2 Airline hedge
9.3.3 Reducing storage costs
9.3.4 Reﬁnery margin hedge
9.4 Pricing options
9.4.1 Put–call parity
9.4.2 Factors affecting option prices
9.4.3 Measuring price volatility
Appendix 
9.1 Jet fuel option indication, price cap
9.2 Jet fuel option indication, zero premium collar
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 432/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 433/964 ---
9.1 Introduction 
Options allow the user to create a position that reﬂects virtually any market view or risk proﬁle. They are more ﬂexible than for-wards or futures, which can only be used to take a long or short position. Combining options with other instruments allows par-ticipants to structure risk management and trading strategies that can match or control their exposure. 
Options have existed for many years, often embedded in 
normal commercial contracts, but they were rarely regarded as an asset and – as a result – were largely undervalued. However
, 
now that mathematical models provide an accepted method for valuing assets, a standardised methodology is widely used for cal-culating option values and risk. And the fact that these models have proved to be robust throughout the volatility cycle has given the industry the conﬁdence to expand and develop the options market. 
Options are currently traded both on the regulated futures 
exchanges and on the unregulated “over
-the-counter” (OTC) 
market. The OTC market offers more ﬂexibility and frequently provides the innovative pressure required to develop new con-tracts. Exchange trading of options formally began in 1973 when the Chicago Board of T
rade (CBOT) created the Chicago Board 
12 10
8
6
4
2
0
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 IPE 
x million cont racts Nyme
Source: Nymex, IPE 
Figure 9.1 Growth of exchange-traded oil options, 1987–1999 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.1/page 1

--- Page 434/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Options Exchange (CBOE) to offer options on individual company 
stocks and many other exchanges have followed suit. Options have spread rapidly from company stocks to the ﬁnancial and commodity markets, including oil. 
The ﬁrst exchange traded options in oil were traded on the 
International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) in 1983 on an informal basis, and by the end of 1986 there was enough interest from the industry for the New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex) to launch an options contract based on West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude. Since then, several more exchange-traded options contracts have been created by the Nymex and the IPE includ-ing New York Harbor heating oil and gasoline, the Nymex 3:2:1 “crack spread”, US natural gas, Brent crude oil and north-west Europe gasoil. The OTC market has also expanded greatly in terms of participants and the types of contracts offered. OTC con-tracts are written on a greater variety of crude oils, products and natural gas pricing indices. 
Over the past 10 years, the use of options in the energy 
industry has increased rapidly
, largely because of their success 
as an effective risk management and trading tool. Further growth in the options market will come from a wider acceptance by those sectors of the economy that recognise the need to protect the value of their assets from the volatility of the market. 
9.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 435/964 ---
9.2 What is an option? 
Options work like insurance. They provide the buyer (or option 
holder ) with protection against the adverse effects of unpre-
dictable future price movements in exchange for a ﬁxed payment (or premium ) that is paid in advance to the seller (or option 
writer ). The option holder
’s risk is limited to the premium – which 
is retained by the option writer whatever happens to prices – while the option writer’s risk is unlimited, because the option holder must be compensated for any adverse price movements. 
Options are different from other trading instruments 
because they give the option holder the right, but not the obliga­
tion, to buy (or sell) an underlying asset at a speciﬁed price 
during an agreed period of time. 
As a result, an options contract 
will only be exercised if the market moves in favour of the holder. 
9.2.1 Option contracts 
There are 2 basic types of option contract: 
• call options, which give the holder the right to buy , and, 
• put options, which give the holder the right to sell. 
The buyer of a call option pays a premium to the seller and, in return, has the right (but not the obligation) to buy a speciﬁc amount and type of oil at a ﬁxed price, before or at a given date. 
The buyer of a put option pays a premium to the seller and, 
in return, has the right (but not the obligation) to sell a speciﬁc amount and type of oil at a ﬁxed price, before or at a given date. 
The option seller is obliged under the contract to buy or sell 
should the buyer exercise its right. In return for assuming this obligation, the option seller receives the option premium – a non-refundable payment – from the option buyer. Option premiums are typically paid up front (usually within 2 business days fol-lowing the date of the transaction) unless the option contract is traded on an exchange, in which case the margin rules operated by the exchange will apply
. 
The ﬁxed price is usually known as the strike or exercise 
price . The date agreed in the contracts is usually known as the 
expiration date , the exercise date or the maturity of the option. 
If the market price of the underlying asset changes so that it becomes proﬁtable for the buyer to exercise the option, it is described as being in-the-money and acquires an intrinsic value 
as a result. Options that remain unproﬁtable are described as being out-of-the-money
. If the market price is the same as the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.2/page 1

--- Page 436/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Table 9.1 Basic options terminology
Buyer Seller Call option Put option Underlying commodity Quantity Premium 
Strike price Exercise Expiration date Intrinsic value In-the-money Also known as the option holder. The buyer of an option pays a premium (a sum of money) and has the right (but not the obligation) to exercise the option into the underlying contract. Also known as the writer or grantor of the option. The seller receives the premium from the option buyer
, and is obliged to assume the opposite 
position to the option buyer. Gives the option holder the right to buy a speciﬁc amount of a speciﬁed type of commodity at a ﬁxed price. The option writer must sell the commodity should the holder exercise his right to buy. Gives the option holder the right to sell a speciﬁc amount of a speciﬁed type of commodity at a ﬁxed price. The option writer must buy the commodity should the holder exercise his right to sell. Can be any type of crude oil, reﬁned product or natural gas that is speciﬁed in the options contract. An agreed amount of the underlying commodity that is to be delivered under the terms of the contract. Can be measured in barrels, tonnes, litres, gallons or mmbtus. A ﬁxed non-returnable payment made by the option holder to the option writer. The premium is the maximum amount the buyer can lose. The seller receives the premium and in return underwrites the contract. The premium is usually quoted in the same units as the underlying commodity, for example: $ per barrel, $ per tonne, cents per gallon, cents per litre, $ per mmbtu. A ﬁxed price at which the holder of a call option has the right to buy the underlying commodity. Also the ﬁxed price at which the holder of a put option has the right to sell the underlying commodity. The action taken by the option holder who wishes to acquire or sell the underlying commodity as speciﬁed on the option contract. The last day on which an option can be exercised. The amount of money that could be realised by exercising an option. An option is deemed to be in-the-money if it has an intrinsic value. Its intrinsic value is the amount by which it is in-the-money. 
9.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 437/964 ---
9 Options
Table 9.1 Continued
Out-of-the-money	 A call option is deemed to be out-of-the-money if the market price is below the strike price. 
At-the-money	 An option is deemed to be at-the-money if the market price is the same as the option strike price. 
An at-the-money option has no intrinsic 
value. 
Extrinsic The amount by which the premium of an option 
value exceeds its intrinsic value. 
Also known as the time 
value of an option. 
Table 9.2 Option prices, $/barrel Underlying market price: $20.00, 30 days left to expiry 
Strike Calls Puts 
price Premium Status Premium Status 
18.00 2.05 in-the-money 0.05 out-of-the-money 
19.00 1.20 in-the-money 0.20 out-of-the-money 
20.00 0.56 at-the-money 0.56 at-the-money 
21.00 0.21 out-of-the-money 1.21 in-the-money 
22.00 0.08 out-of-the-money 2.08 in-the-money 
exercise price, the option is described as being at-the-money (see Table 9.2). 
A call option has an intrinsic value when the strike price 
is below the market price. For example, if the strike price is $18/barrel and the market price is $20/barrel, the intrinsic value of the call option is $2/barrel. 
A put option has an intrinsic value when the strike price 
is above the market price. For example, if the strike price is $22/barrel and the market price is $20/barrel, the intrinsic value of the put option is $2/barrel. 
An option may be out-of-the-money and still have a premium 
value . This is because of the option’
s time value or extrinsic value . 
As long as an option has time left to expiry, there is a probabil-ity that it might end up in-the-money before expiry, in which case it would acquire an intrinsic value . 
For example, if a call option has 30 days left to expiration, 
the strike price is $20/barrel and the market price is $19/barrel, 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 9.2/page 3

--- Page 438/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
the option premium is $0.21/barrel even though it has no intrin -
sic value at present. 
9.2.2 Types of option 
Options can be based on and therefore exercised into a wide variety of trading instruments. They can also be traded either on a futures exchange or as private transactions on the OTC market. 
Exchange traded options are based on futures contracts and 
are standardised contracts. The settlement terms are ﬁxed, the expiry dates are ﬁxed, and only a limited range of strike prices are quoted at any point in time. 
As a result, the premium is the 
only negotiable component. 
OTC options are more ﬂexible as they can be tailored to meet 
any set of speciﬁcations required. Everything in the contract is negotiable: the quantity
, type, delivery or settlement procedure 
of the underlying asset, the expiry date, and the strike price for the contract. 
Like futures contracts, exchange-traded options are guaran-
teed by the clearing organisation that underwrites the exchange. OTC options are guaranteed by the counterparties in the contract and are subject to the normal contractual performance risks asso-ciated with trading directly with companies. OTC contracts are usually based on an ISDA* (International Swaps and Derivatives Association) contract or sometimes on a company’
s own contract 
– although this is now being discouraged for the sake of standardisation. Exchange-traded options Exchange-traded options are bought and sold on the trading ﬂoors of the futures exchanges in designated areas (called pits) which are located near the underlying futures contract pit. Prices are quoted in the trading pits by open outcry
. Registered brokers 
execute orders placed with them on behalf of their clients on the exchange. Price quotes can be obtained either electronically through price reporting vendors or by asking a broker to enquire on the exchange. 
Trading in options may commence once an account is opened 
with a clearing exchange member
. To place an order to buy or 
sell, the client informs the exchange broker of the trade details, the order is then passed to the trading ﬂoor where a ﬂoor broker 
* www.isda.org. 
9.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 439/964 ---
9 Options
will execute the order in the trading pit. Once a trade has taken place, the information is logged and reported. Prices and trades are logged real-time and are displayed electronically on the exchange ﬂoor and also fed into vendor price reporting systems available to the public. 
The transaction is then cleared and allocated to your 
account. The option position you now hold in the account will be marked to market at the close of business each day
. You may be 
required to place funds with your clearing broker to cover deposit and variation margins in order to offset the costs of adverse market movements to your position. 
Brokers are required by exchanges to provide you with ﬁnan-
cial statements showing the value of your position to the market. The transparency of prices on the exchange allows position holders to monitor their own exposure. 
Premiums on the Nymex are payable immediately. On the 
International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), however
, premiums are 
not transferred because of the exchange’s margining system. In all cases the clearing organisation is the counterparty to the transaction. OTC options OTC options are contracts made between two counterparties. Companies who transact in this manner are typically major oil companies, reﬁners, producers, distributors, end users (including transport and utility companies), banks, traders, insurance com-panies and investment funds. 
Trading in the OTC market offers greater ﬂexibility and 
beneﬁts. In particular: 
•	positions can be tailored to match any risk proﬁle, 
•	contracts can be exercised into a wide range of reﬁned products, crude oils and natural gas, 
•	pricing periods, timing, location and price indices can all be negotiated thus eliminating any basis risk, 
•	large volumes can be more easily traded, 
•	trade and project ﬁnance can be combined with OTC options to provide alternatives to traditional ﬁnancing methods, 
•	investor participation vehicles can be constructed to reﬂect risk appetites, 
•	transaction details are generally kept conﬁdential between the counterparties, 
•	transaction costs are often lower, 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 9.2/page 5

--- Page 440/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
•	direct dealing relationships between companies can 
often enhance trading relationships. 
A company wishing to trade an OTC option may call on a number of counterparties with whom credit lines and contracts are in place. A quote (in the form of a price) would then be requested. Once a trade has taken place, it is agreed verbally on the tele-phone, followed by a fax or telex for conﬁrmation and then a signed original contract. 
Premiums tend to be paid within 2 business days (although 
some companies may specify 5 business days). 
A company will 
typically have a pre-arranged amount of trade credit available with a number of other counterparties. Letters of credit, bank guarantees and deposits are sometimes required to secure trading lines. 
Positions are marked to market daily, although some com-
panies operate on an intra-day basis. Exercising options There two basic methods of exercising options: 
•	American options, which can be exercised at any time 
up to the expiry date, and 
•	European options, which can only be exercised on the 
expiry date. 
Exchange traded options are all American, while OTC options can be of either type. Some option writers prefer to sell European options as this allows them to plan their exposure more accurately
. 
Options are usually exercised when the buyer notiﬁes the 
option writer of their intention to do so. In the case of an exchange traded option the notiﬁcation is sent to the clearing organisation via a clearing member of the exchange, the option is then con-verted into an appropriate futures position on the following busi-ness day. In the case of an OTC option the buyer typically notiﬁes the option writer by telephone (followed up with telex or fax con-ﬁrmation) and the underlying asset is delivered as speciﬁed in the contract. In both cases, options are usually automatically exercised on the last day of trading if they are deemed to be in-the-money
. 
Another method of settling or exercising options that is reg-
ulary used in the OTC market is the Asian or average settlement 
price option . Asian or average price options are typically settled 
9.2/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 441/964 ---
9 Options
in cash. The settlement is calculated using the average of the price settlements of an index over the life of a contract. Asian options are typically used to match the pricing methods used in the physical markets. Sellers of options sometimes prefer these to American or European types as exposure to volatile market movements may be reduced due to the averaging of prices. 9.2.3 Option trading positions 
There are four basic option trading positions, each of which has its own characteristic proﬁle of risk and reward: 
•	buy a call , i.e. purchase an option to buy the underly-
ing commodity or asset, 
•	buy a put , i.e. purchase an option to sell the underly-
ing commodity or asset, 
•	sell a call , i.e. write a contract that gives the purchaser 
the option to buy the underlying commodity or asset, 
•	sell a put , i.e. write a contract that gives the purchaser 
the option to sell the underlying commodity or asset. 
In forward and futures markets, both buyer and seller have the same symmetric price risks. In the case of the buyer
, any 
potential proﬁt from a rise in prices is mirrored by the poten-tial loss from a decline in prices (see Fig. 9.2). And the exact opposite applies to the seller (see Fig. 9.3). 
As a result, there are 
-10 -5 0 5 10 
15 20 30 
lyi ii ll i
Buyi
10 25 
Under ng market pr ce Loss Profit Pr ces fa
to $18 Prices r se 
to $22 
 forward/futures: $20 Loss: $2 Prof t: $2 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.2 Buying a forward or futures contract 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 9.2/page 7

--- Page 442/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 30 
lyi iii l i i
Under ng market pr ce Loss Profit 
Sell forward/futures: $20 Prof t: $2 Pr ces fal
to $18 Pr ces r se 
to $22 
Loss: $2 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.3 Selling a forward or futures contact 
only 2 basic types of forward or futures trading position, long and short. 
In the options market, however, the buyer and seller have 
very different exposures to price risk. The option holder’s proﬁt is unlimited, while the loss is limited to the premium paid. And the option writer’s proﬁt is limited to the premium received, while the loss is unlimited. Buying a call option The holder of a call option (which confers the right to buy at an agreed price) makes an unlimited proﬁt if prices rise and only loses a ﬁxed amount if prices fall (see Fig. 9.4). The risks on the upside are therefore the same as for a long forward or futures contract (see Fig. 9.2). Example Buy a call option: 
Strike price: $20.00/barrel Premium: 
$0.50/barrel 
If the price of oil rises to $22/barrel at expiration of the contract, the option will have an in-the-money value or intrinsic value of $2.00/barrel and will therefore be automatically exercised. The 
9.2/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 443/964 ---
9 Options
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
lyi il i
i  i
i l ise 
pri
30 
Under ng market pr ce Loss Profit Exercise cal opt on when 
pr ce s above $20 
Pr ces fal
to $18 Prices r
to $22 
Loss: $0.50 Profit: $1.50 
Strike ce: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.4 Buying a call option proﬁt on this transaction is $1.50/barrel, which is calculated by subtracting the call option premium from the intrinsic value: 
$2.00 -$0.50 = $1.50/barrel 
If the price of oil falls to $18/barrel, the option will expire out of the money
, have no intrinsic value and will not be exercised. The 
loss on this transaction is therefore limited to the premium paid, $0.50/barrel. Buying a put option The holder of a put option (which confers the right to sell at an agreed price) makes an unlimited proﬁt if prices fall, and only loses a ﬁxed amount if prices rise (see Fig. 9.5). The risks on the upside are therefore the same as for a short forward or futures contract (see Fig. 9.3). Example Buy a put option: 
Strike price: $20.00/barrel Premium: 
$0.50/barrel 
If the price of oil falls to $18/barrel at expiration of the contract, the option will have an in-the-money value or intrinsic value of $2.00/barrel and will be automatically exercised. The proﬁt of the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.2/page 9

--- Page 444/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
lyi ili l ise 
pri
30 
Under ng market pr ce Loss Profit 
Exercise put option when 
price is be ow $20 Pr ces fal
to $18 Prices r
to $22 
Profit: $1.50 Loss: $0.50 
Strike ce: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.5 Payoff from buying a put option 
transaction is $1.50/barrel and is calculated by subtracting the 
put option premium from the intrinsic value: 
$2.00 -$0.50 = $1.50/barrel 
If the price of oil rises to $22/barrel at expiration, the option will be out-of-the-money
, have no intrinsic value and will not be exer-
cised. The loss on this transaction is therefore limited to the premium paid, $0.50/barrel. Selling a call option The writer of a call option (which gives the holder the right to buy at an agreed price) makes a ﬁxed proﬁt if prices fall, and is exposed to an unlimited loss if prices rise (see Fig. 9.6). The risks on the downside are therefore the same as for a short futures or forward contract (see Fig. 9.3). Example Sell a call option: 
Strike price: $20.00/barrel Premium: 
$0.50/barrel 
If the price of oil is at or below $20/barrel at expiration of the contract, the option will expire out-of-the-money – so will not be 
9.2/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 445/964 ---
9 Options
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
lyi ill i
ices fall 
pri
30 
Under ng market pr ce Loss Profit Ca  option s exercised 
when price is above $20 
Pr
to $18 Prices rise 
to $22 
Profit: $0.50 Loss: $1.50 
Strike ce: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.6 Selling a call option exercised – and the seller keeps the premium received. The proﬁt on this trade is therefore limited to the premium: $0.50/barrel. 
If the price of oil rises to $22/barrel at expiration the option 
will be exercised and the writer is obligated to sell oil at $20/barrel. The loss on this transaction is $1.50/barrel and is cal-culated by subtracting the market price from the strike price: 
$20 -$22 =-$2/barrel 
and adding the premium received: 
-$2.00 +$0.50 =-$1.50/barrel 
Selling a put option The writer of a put option (which gives the holder the right to sell at an agreed price) makes a ﬁxed proﬁt if prices rise, and is exposed to an unlimited loss if prices fall (see Fig. 9.7). The risks on the downside are therefore the same as that of a long futures or forward contract (see Fig. 9.2). Example Sell a put option: 
Strike price: $20.00/barrel Premium: 
$0.50/barrel 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.2/page 11

--- Page 446/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
lyi iLoss Profit i
ll ices rise 
pri
30 
Under ng market pr ce Put opt on is exercised 
when price is below $20 
Prices fa
to $18 Pr
to $22 
Loss: $1.50 Profit: $0.50 
Strike ce: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.7 Selling a put option 
If the price of oil is at or above $20/barrel at expiration of the 
contract, the option will expire out-of-the-money – so will not be exercised – and the seller keeps the premium received. The proﬁt on this trade is limited to the premium: $0.50/barrel. 
If the price of oil falls below $20/barrel at expiration, the con-
tract will have an intrinsic value – calculated by subtracting the strike price from the market price – and will be exercised. 
If the price of oil falls to $18/barrel at expiration, the seller 
is still obliged to buy at $20/barrel. The loss on this transaction is $1.50/barrel and is calculated by subtracting the premium received from the intrinsic value: 
$2.00 -$0.50 =$1.50/barrel 
9.2.4 Synthetic contracts 
Options contracts can also be used to replicate a short or long position in the forward or futures market. For example, it should now be clear from comparing their respective risk and reward proﬁles, that taking a long position in the forward or futures market is equivalent to simultaneously selling a put and buying a call at the same strike price and for the same maturity: 
+F
ORWARD =+C ALL -PUT 
This is known as a synthetic long forward or futures position (see Fig. 9.8). 
9.2/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 447/964 ---
9 Options
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
l ill 
lt 
30 
Under ying market pr ce Loss Profit 
Buy ca option Write put option Net resuStrike pr ice: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.8 Synthetic long forward or futures contract Example 
Buy a $20/barrel call option: -$0.50/barrel 
Sell a $20/barrel put option: +$0.50/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/barrel 
If prices rise to $21/barrel, the call option will have an intrinsic value of $1/barrel and the put option will have no intrinsic value. The proﬁt on the transaction is the intrinsic value minus the net cost: 
$1.00 -$0.00 =$1.00/barrel 
If prices fall to $19/barrel, the call option will have no intrinsic value and the put option will have an intrinsic value of -
$1.00/barrel. The proﬁt of the transaction is therefore: 
-$1.00 -$0.00 =-$1.00/barrel 
This position has the same proﬁt/loss proﬁle as a long futures or forward position at $20/barrel (see Fig. 9.2). Similarly, taking a short position in the forward or futures market is equivalent to simultaneously buying a put and selling a call at the same strike price and for the same maturity: 
-F
ORWARD =-C ALL +PUT 
This is a short synthetic forward or futures position (see Fig. 9.9). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.2/page 13

--- Page 448/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
l ii
ion 
lt i
30 
Under ying market pr ce Loss Profit Sell call opt on Buy put optNet resuStrike pr ce: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.9 Synthetic short forward or futures contract 
Example 
Buy a $20/barrel put option: -$0.50/barrel 
Sell a $20/barrel call option: +$0.50/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/barrel 
If prices fall to $19/barrel, the put option will have an intrinsic value of $1/barrel and the call option will have no intrinsic value. The proﬁt on the transaction is the intrinsic value minus the net cost: 
$1.00 -$0.00 =$1.00/barrel 
If prices rise to $21/barrel, the put option will have no intrinsic value and the call option will have an intrinsic value of -
$1.00/barrel. The proﬁt on the transaction is therefore: 
-$1.00 -$0.00 =-$1.00/barrel 
This position has the same proﬁt/loss proﬁle as a long futures or forward position at $20/barrel (see Fig. 9.3). Furthermore, it is also possible to replicate the risk and reward characteristics of a call (or put) option with an appropriate com-bination of forward or futures contracts and a put (or call) option. 
For example, buying a put option and taking a long position 
in the forward or futures market is equivalent to buying a call option (see Fig. 9.10): 
9.2/page 14 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 449/964 ---
9 Options
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
l i/i
30 
Under ying market pr ce Loss Profit 
Buy forward futures Buy put option Net payoff Str ke price: $20 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.10 Synthetic long call option 
+CALL =+F ORWARD +PUT 
Buying a call option and taking a short position in the forward or futures market is equivalent to buying a put option: 
+P
UT =+C ALL -FORWARD 
And, by re-arrangement, selling a put or selling a call is also equivalent to: 
-P
UT =+F ORWARD -CALL 
-CALL =-P UT -FORWARD 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.2/page 15

--- Page 450/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 451/964 ---
9.3 Using options 
Options can be used to achieve a great variety of possible out-comes depending on the exposure and risk preferences of the user
. Given the inherent ﬂexibility of the four basic option posi-
tions, even simple trading strategies can yield different results. Combinations of option contracts can be used to produce tailor
-
made risk management and trading proﬁles, often at a very low cost. This section describes 4 common option trading strategies that are widely used in the oil industry. 9.3.1 Producer hedge 
An oil producer would like to hedge the value of its production. The current price of crude is $20/barrel. The producer expects prices to ﬂuctuate in the range of $19–$21/barrel during the period of the hedge, but is concerned about the risk of prices falling below $19/barrel. If the producer is also prepared to accept a maximum price of $21/barrel for its production, a combination of put and call options can be used to hedge at no cost. Example 
Buy a $19/barrel put option: -$0.25/barrel 
Sell a $21/barrel call option: +$0.25/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/barrel 
The result of this strategy is to limit the downside and upside price risks to a range between $19/barrel and $21/barrel (see Fig. 9.1
1). 
If prices fall below $19/barrel, the $19 put option will be 
exercised giving the producer the right to sell its output at $19/barrel, however low prices go. 
If prices rise above $21/barrel, the $21 call option will be 
exercised and the producer will be obliged to sell crude at $21/barrel, however high prices go. If prices are between $19/barrel and $21/barrel, neither option will be exercised and the producer sells its crude at the prevailing market price. 
This trading strategy is known as a zero cost collar. The 
strike price of the options can be set at any level, but the put and call options must be equally far out-of-the-money if the cost of the put and call premium is to be the same. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.3/page 1

--- Page 452/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-10 -5 0 5 10 
10 15 20 25 
l il l ion 
lt i l
i
30 
Under ying market pr ce Loss Profit 
Buy $19 put option Sel $21 cal  optNet resuExercise put opt on 
when prices go below $19 Cal option is exercised 
when prices rise above $21 
Producer exposed to price r sk 
$19�$ 21 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.1 1 Hedging crude oil sales, zero cost collar 
9.3.2 Airline hedge 
An airline has based its jet fuel purchasing budget on a maximum price of $190/tonne for the winter period. The current price for jet kerosene cif NW Europe is $170/tonne. The purchasing department have decided not to lock in a price at the current market level because they feel that prices may fall further to around $150/tonne. To protect themselves against a price move above $190/tonne, the purchasing department could buy $190 call options at a cost of $1/tonne. Example 
Buy a $190/tonne call option: -
 $1.00/tonne 
Net cost of transaction: $1.00/tonne 
The result of this strategy is to limit the upside price risk so that the maximum price paid by the airline for its jet fuel would be $190/tonne (see Fig. 9.12). 
If prices remain below $190/tonne, the $190 call option will 
not be exercised and the purchasing department can meet its budget target with direct purchases on the spot market. 
If prices rise above $190/tonne, the $190 call option will be 
exercised and the airline can obtain its supplies from the option writer at $190/tonne, however high spot market prices go. 
9.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 453/964 ---
9 Options
lLoss Profit 
-20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 
150 160 170 180 190 200 i ill i
i
Airli i
Under ying market price 210 Str ke pr ce: $190 Exercise ca opt on 
when price s above $190 
Current price: $170 ne’s pr ce exposure 
$170� $190 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.12 Hedging fuel purchases, buy a call option 
If the airline purchasing department thinks that the 
$1/tonne premium is too expensive, they could consider selling put options to ﬁnance the cost of buying the call option. Selling a $150 put option would generate a premium of $1/tonne that exactly offsets the cost of buying the $190 call option (a zero cost collar). Example 
Buy a $190/tonne call option: -$1.00/tonne 
Sell a $150/tonne put option: +$1.00/tonne 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/tonne 
The result of this strategy is to limit the upside and downside price risks to a range between $190/tonne and $150/tonne. 
If prices rise above $190/tonne, the $190 call option will be 
exercised giving the purchasing department the right to buy its supplies at a maximum price of $190/tonne, however high prices go. 
If prices fall below $150/tonne, the $150 put option will be 
exercised and the purchasing department will be obliged to buy jet fuel at $150/tonne, however low prices go. If prices are between $150/tonne and $190/tonne, neither option will be exercised and the airline buys its jet fuel at the prevailing market price. 
Both these strategies are widely used by airlines and the 
strike prices can be set at any level. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.3/page 3

--- Page 454/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
9.3.3 Reducing storage costs 
A trader is holding product in storage at a monthly cost of $2.50/tonne. The current market price of the reﬁned product is $155/tonne. If prices rise by $5/tonne the trader will sell the product, otherwise the long position will be maintained. However, the cost of storage can be reduced by selling an out-of-the-money call option that still allows the trader to make a proﬁt should prices rise by $5/tonne. Example 
Sell a $160/tonne call option: +
 $1.00/tonne 
Net cost of transaction: +$1.00/tonne 
This strategy caps the maximum sales price for the trader’s product at $160/tonne in exchange for a ﬁxed premium of $1/tonne that can be offset against the cost of storage (see Fig. 9.13). 
If market prices remain below $160/tonne until expiration, 
the $160 call option will not be exercised and the trader will keep the product in storage as planned. However
, the trader still 
retains the $1/tonne call premium paid by the option holder and so the net storage cost is reduced: 
$2.50 -$1.00 = $1.50/tonne 
If market prices rise above $160/tonne, the $160 call option will be exercised by the holder and the trader will only receive a 
lLoss Profit 
-10 -5 0 5 10 
150 155 160 iCal i
 when pri i
ii
Under ying market price 165 Str ke price: $160 l opt on is exercised
ce s above $160 
Current pr ce: $155 Trader’s pr ce exposure 
$155�$160 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.13 Reducing storage costs, sell a call option 
9.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 455/964 ---
9 Options
maximum selling price of $160/tonne, however high prices go. However, the trader still retains the $1/tonne option premium and so achieves the $5/tonne proﬁt objective at a lower storage cost. 9.3.4 Reﬁnery margin hedge 
A reﬁner would like to hedge the gas oil crack spread without losing the opportunity to proﬁt from higher margins should the spread widen in the future. The current crack spread between Brent and gas oil is $4.50/barrel. If the reﬁner buys an at-the-money crack spread put option at a cost of $0.25/barrel, it will be protected against a narrowing of the crack spread. But if the crack spread widens, the reﬁner will be able to beneﬁt from the increase after allowing for the cost of the put option. Example 
Buy a $4.50/barrel put option: -
 $0.25/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: -$0.25/barrel 
This strategy eliminates the downside risk on the crack spread and leaves the reﬁner free to participate in any upside price movements (see Fig. 9.14). 
If the crack spread falls below the current market level of 
$4.50/barrel, the reﬁner will exercise his option to sell at this price, thus avoiding any exposure to a narrower crack spread. 
lyi iLoss Profit 
-1.00 -0.50 
i
i ii ion
 when pri i
Refi i
Under ng market pr ce 0.00 0.50 1.00 
3.50 4.00 4.50 5.00 5.50 Current pr ce: $4.50 
Str ke pr ce: $4.50 Exerc se put opt
ce s below $4.50 
ner exposed to pr ces
 above $4.50 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.14 Hedging reﬁnery margins, buy a put option 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.3/page 5

--- Page 456/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
If the crack spread widens, the put option will not be exer -
cised and the reﬁner is free to sell at the higher market price. However, the potential proﬁt is reduced by the cost of the premium paid for the put option. For example, if the crack spread widens to $5/barrel, the net gain to the reﬁner would be: 
$5.00 -$4.50 -$0.25 =+$0.25/barrel 
If the reﬁner feels that the put option premium is too high, it could reduce the cost of hedging by selling out-of-the-money call options. Example 
Buy a $4.50/barrel put option: -$0.25/barrel 
Sell a $4.75/barrel call option: +$0.15/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: -$0.10/barrel 
This strategy eliminates the downside price risk on the crack spread and caps the upside proﬁt potential for the reﬁner in exchange for a lower cost of hedging (see Fig. 9.15). 
If the crack spread falls below the current market level of 
$4.50/barrel, the reﬁner will exercise the option to sell at this price, thus avoiding any exposure to a narrower crack spread. The call option will not be exercised by the holder
, but the reﬁner 
--
3.50 5.00 
iSell $4.75 call option i Call
i
Refi
$4.50�$4.75 
1.00 0.50 0.00 0.50 1.00 
4.00 4.50 5.50 
Underly ng market price Loss Profit 
Buy $4.50 put option Net result Exercise put opt on 
when prices go below $4.50  option is exercised 
when prices r se above $4.75 
ner’s price exposure 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.15 Hedging reﬁnery margins, low cost collar option 
9.3/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 457/964 ---
9 Options
will retain the premium received and this reduces the cost of hedging: 
-$0.25 +$0.15 =-$0.10/barrel 
This is known as a low cost collar option. 
If the crack spread widens to more than $4.50/barrel, the put 
option will not be exercised leaving the reﬁner free to sell at the higher market price. 
Any additional proﬁt from the widening 
crack spread above $4.75/barrel is offset by the call option, which will now be exercised by the holder. As a result, the reﬁner will be obliged to sell the crack spread at $4.75/barrel, whatever happens to prices. However, the reﬁner still makes a proﬁt, because the net cost of hedging is less than the increase in the crack spread: 
($4.75 -$4.50) +(
 -$0.25 +$0.15) =+$0.15/barrel 
Once again, the put and call strike prices can be set at any level required by the reﬁner
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.3/page 7

--- Page 458/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 459/964 ---
9.4 Pricing options 
The price of an option, like any other derivative trading instru-ment, is determined partly through arbitrage and partly by the market itself. In the case of options, the key arbitrage relation-ships are with the forward and futures markets for the underly-ing commodity or asset. 
Since different combinations of option contracts can be used 
to replicate the trading characteristics of forwards and futures, the price of an option cannot get very far out of line with its forward or futures market equivalent. In the same way
, arbitrage 
also ensures that the strict price relationship between the 2 sides of the options market – puts and calls – remains intact. This is known as put–call parity . As a result, the options market itself 
is primarily concerned with the question of future price volatil-ity, which is what determines the price of an option once the underlying arbitrage relationships have been taken into account. 9.4.1 Put–call parity 
Options contracts can be used to replicate a short or long posi-tion in the forward or futures market ( see Section 9.2.4 ). 
For example, taking a long position in the forward or futures 
market is equivalent to simultaneously buying a call and selling a put option at the same strike price and for the same maturity: 
+F
ORWARD =+C ALL -PUT 
Example 
Buy a $20/barrel call option: -$0.25/barrel 
Sell a $20/barrel put option: +$0.25/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/barrel 
Assume both options will expire in 30 days’ time. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $20/barrel at expiry
, the proﬁt/loss on the trade will be zero as both option posi-
tions have no intrinsic value. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $21/barrel at 
expiry
, the short put option will expire worthless (i.e. with no 
intrinsic value), while the long call option will have an intrinsic value of $1/barrel. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $19/barrel at 
expiry 
, the long call option will expire worthless (i.e. with no 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 1

--- Page 460/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
intrinsic value), while the short put option will have an intrinsic 
value of -$1/barrel. 
Compare these outcomes to a long position in the underly-
ing futures contract at $20/barrel (see Fig. 9.2). They are identical. Similarly, taking a short position in the forward or futures market is equivalent to simultaneously buying a put and selling a call at the same strike price and for the same maturity
. 
-FORWARD =-C ALL +PUT 
Example 
Buy a $20/barrel put option: -$0.25/barrel 
Sell a $20/barrel call option: +$0.25/barrel 
Net cost of transaction: $0.00/barrel 
Assume both options will expire in 30 days’ time. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $20/barrel at expiry
, the proﬁt/(loss) on the trade will be zero as both option 
positions have no intrinsic value. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $21/barrel at 
expiry
, the short call option will expire worthless (i.e. with no 
intrinsic value), while the long put option will have an intrinsic value of $1/barrel. 
If the underlying futures contract is trading at $19/barrel at 
expiry 
, the long put option will expire worthless (i.e. with no 
intrinsic value), while the short call option will have an intrinsic value of -$1/barrel. 
Compare these outcomes to a short position in the underly-
ing futures contract at $20/barrel (see Fig. 9.3). They are also identical. Conversion arbitrage The fact that options can create identical results to a futures or forward position creates the possibility of arbitrage between them. Market forces should therefore keep prices in line with each other
. 
Example 
Futures contract: $20.00/barrel 
$17/barrel call option: $0.25/barrel 
$17/barrel put option: $0.25/barrel 
9.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 461/964 ---
9 Options
If the $20 call and put option premiums were different to each other when the futures price was also at $20/barrel, arbitrage would be possible. 
For example, if the cost of a $20 call option was $0.30/barrel 
and the cost of a put option was $0.25/barrel, it would be possi-ble to create a synthetic short futures position equivalent to $20.05/barrel and simultaneously buy the actual futures contract at $20.00/barrel, thus locking in $0.05/barrel proﬁt on the transaction: 
Sell $20 call option	 +
 $0.30/barrel 
Buy $20 put option	 - $0.25/barrel 
= Synthetic short futures position $20.05/barrel 
Long futures	 - $20.00/barrel 
Short synthetic futures	 + $20.05/barrel 
Net proﬁt on transaction:	 $0.05/barrel 
Such an arbitrage opportunity could not exist for long and parity between puts and calls would quickly be re-established. 9.4.2 Factors affecting option prices 
There are 5 key factors that affect the price of an option based on an underlying commodity
, such as oil, that pays no dividend: 
•	the current price of the underlying commodity, 
•	the strike price of the option, 
•	the time remaining to expiry, 
•	the future price volatility of the underlying commod-ity, and 
•	the current (risk free) interest rate for borrowing money
. 
In ﬁnancial terms, the price of an option is simply the present value of the future income stream that can be expected from holding the option contract. 
Although the actual value of any 
future income stream from the option will not be known for certain until it expires, the market takes a view based on the expected price volatility of the underlying commodity and this can be deduced from the option premium by comparing it with the strike price and the current price of the underlying commodity. 
The value of any option premium can therefore be split into 
two parts, the current (or intrinsic ) value of the contract and the 
future (or time) value of the contract: 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 9.4/page 3

--- Page 462/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
OPTION PREMIUM = INTRINSIC VALUE + TIME VALUE 
The intrinsic value of an options contract is easily determined since it depends on whether or not the contract is in the money. 
I
NTRINSIC VALUE OF CALL = UNDERLYING VALUE -STRIKE PRICE 
INTRINSIC VALUE OF PUT = STRIKE PRICE -UNDERLYING VALUE 
TIME VALUE = OPTION PREMIUM -INTRINSIC VALUE 
Example 
Underlying futures: $20.00/barrel 
$19/barrel call option: $1.21/barrel 
The $19 call option is in-the-money with an intrinsic value of $1.00/barrel: 
$20.00 -$19.00 = $1.00, 
and a time value of $0.21/barrel: 
$1.21 -$1.00 = $0.21. 
Example 
Underlying futures: $20.00/barrel 
$19/barrel put option: $0.21/barrel 
The $19 put option is out-of-the-money and has no intrinsic value because there would be nothing to be gained from exercising a put option when the underlying price is above the strike price. However
, the put option still has a time value of $0.21/barrel: 
$1.21 -$0.00 = $0.21. 
The time value of an option increases with the length of the period to expiry
. This is because there is a greater opportunity 
for prices to trade over a wider range as more time elapses. The same principle applies to a house insurance policy. A policy that has 1 year left to expiry will have a higher premium than one expiring in 6 months’ time because there is a greater chance of a claim. 
At-the-money options have the highest time value as there 
is an equal probability that they will be in- or out-of-the-money at expiration. If an option is out-of-the-money
, it is more proba-
ble that it will expire out-of-the-money than an option that is nearer to or at-the-money since the underlying prices will have 
9.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 463/964 ---
9 Options
to change by much more to reach the strike price and, as a result, will have a lower time value. Similarly, an option that is deep in-the-money, is more likely to expire in-the-money than an option that is nearer to or at-the-money for the same reasons. Example 
Underlying futures: $20.00/barrel 
$19/barrel put option $0.20/barrel 
$20/barrel put option: $0.56/barrel 
$22/barrel put option: $2.08/barrel 
The $20 put option is at-the-money and so has no intrinsic value: 
$20.00 -$20.00 = $0.00, 
as a result the entire value of the premium is due to its time value: 
$0.56 -$0.00 = $0.56. 
The $19 put option is out-of-the-money and also has no intrinsic value. However
, its premium – and therefore its time value – is 
lower than for the $20 at-the-money call option: 
$0.20 -$0.00 = $0.20. 
The $22 put option is in-the-money and has an intrinsic value of $2.00/barrel: 
$22.00 -$20.00 = $2.00. 
However, its time value is lower because it is even further away from the money than the $19 put option: 
$2.08 -$2.00 = $0.08. 
Volatility is the most important factor in option pricing. It meas-ures the likely magnitude of price changes over a given period, and is expressed as a percentage of the underlying market price. V
olatility is calculated as the annualised standard deviation of 
the distribution of percentage changes in daily prices, which is assumed to be a normal distribution ( see Section 9.4.3 ). This 
allows option users to assign known conﬁdence limits to the future trading range of the market. For example, a market volatility of 20 per cent means there is a 68 per cent chance that the price of oil will lie within a range of ±20 per cent around the 
current price level a year from now. The greater the market volatility, the greater the range that prices are likely to trade in (see Fig. 9.16). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 5

--- Page 464/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Price y Low volatilit High volatility 
Price 
Time Time 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.16 Effect of volatility on price behaviour 
Example 
Current price of crude oil is $18.00/barrel Market volatility =±20%. 
$18 ¥ + 20% =+ $3.60/barrel 
$18 ¥ -20% =-$3.60/barrel 
The time value of an option increases with the volatility of the market. If volatility is expected to be low
, the future trading 
range will be narrower and the present value of the potential income stream from holding an option will be smaller since there is a lower probability of a large change in prices before expiry. However, if volatility is expected to be high, the future trading range will be wider and the present value of the potential income stream from holding an option will be larger since there is a higher probability of a large change in prices before expiry. 9.4.3 Measuring price volatility 
There are 2 types of price volatility used in pricing options: 
• historical volatility 
• implied volatility 
Historical volatility – as its name suggests – is the range that prices have traded in over a given period in the past. Implied 
9.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 465/964 ---
9 Options
$/barrel 4.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 0.00 
-1.00 
-2.00 
-3.00 
-4.00 
-5.00 
Jan 92 Jan 93 Jan 94 Jan 95 Jan 96 Jan 97 Jan 98 Jan 99 Jan 00 Jan 01 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.17 Daily price changes, nearby WTI futures contract volatility is the range that prices are expected to trade over a given period in the future. Implied values are calculated by inputting option premiums into an option pricing model. When assessing the appropriate volatility to use when calculating option premiums, it is important to look at both. 
Historical volatility allows us to see how prices have behaved 
under known market conditions. From this, we may be able to build a conﬁdence level to help us in assessing the predictability of current market situations. 
Implied volatility allows us to see the market’s view of what 
the expected trading range of prices will be over a given period. Implied rates are continually changing to reﬂect the market’
s 
view. Implied volatility is a powerful tool for analysing price risk. It allows us to assess the impact that prices will have on our assets with a given probability. 
In general, oil prices appear to behave approximately like a 
random walk (see Fig. 9.17) and the statistical characteristics of the distribution of price changes conform reasonably closely to those of a normal distribution (see Fig. 9.18). This means the probability that prices might change by a certain amount over a speciﬁed period of time can be described by a single statistical measure – the standard deviation . In the case of a normal dis-
tribution, 68.3 per cent of the price changes are expected to fall within a range of ± one standard deviation of the mean. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 7

--- Page 466/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
0 5 10 15 20 25 
-10% -9% -8% -7% -6% -5% -4% -3% -2% - 1% 2% 3% 5% 6% 7% 
ilMean 
+ 1
 devi-1 
iation l
1% 0% 4% 8% 9% 10% 
Da y price change Number of occurrences  standard
ation standard 
devAnnual vo a tility = 43.9% Data sample: 
Jan� Dec 2001 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.18 Distribution of daily price changes, nearby WTI 
futures 
Calculating historical volatility 
Price volatility is always expressed in terms of the annualised standard deviation of percentage price changes. This provides a common measure of the likely scale of price movement over a known period that can be used in any ﬁnancial calculation of option prices. 
Example The historical volatility of oil futures prices over a 30 day period can be calculated as follows (see T
able 9.3): 
1.	divide the closing price of day 2 by day 1 (and so on) to obtain a series of daily price ratios, 
2.	convert the series of price ratios into natural logarithms, 
3.	calculate the mean of the series of daily logarithms, 
4.	subtract the mean from each daily logarithm and square the result, 
5.	sum the daily squared results, 
6.	divide the sum by 29, the number of daily changes: 30 -1, 
9.4/page 8	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 467/964 ---
� � � � 9 Options
Table 9.3 Calculating historical volatility, 30 day period
Trading Closing Price Log of Log – mean Square day price ratio ratio differences 
1 19.81 2 19.77 0.99798 -
 0.00202 0.00245 0.00001 
3 19.41 0.98179 -0.01838 -0.01390 0.00019 
4 19.26 0.99227 -0.00776 -0.00329 0.00001 
5 18.69 0.97040 -0.03004 -0.02557 0.00065 
6 18.69 1.00000 0.00000 0.00447 0.00002 7 18.78 1.00482 0.00480 0.00928 0.00009 8 18.89 1.00586 0.00584 0.01031 0.00011 9 18.90 1.00053 0.00053 0.00500 0.00003 
10 19.14 1.01270 0.01262 0.01709 0.00029 11 19.25 1.00575 0.00573 0.01020 0.00010 12 19.06 0.99013 -0.00992 -0.00545 0.00003 
13 19.13 1.00367 0.00367 0.00814 0.00007 14 18.91 0.98850 -0.01157 -0.00709 0.00005 
15 18.80 0.99418 -0.00583 -0.00136 0.00000 
16 18.86 1.00319 0.00319 0.00766 0.00006 17 18.91 1.00265 0.00265 0.00712 0.00005 18 19.05 1.00740 0.00738 0.01185 0.00014 19 18.94 0.99423 -0.00579 -0.00132 0.00000 
20 18.84 0.99472 -0.00529 -0.00082 0.00000 
21 18.22 0.96709 -0.03346 -0.02899 0.00084 
22 18.01 0.98847 -0.01159 -0.00712 0.00005 
23 17.46 0.96946 -0.03101 -0.02654 0.00070 
24 17.50 1.00229 0.00229 0.00676 0.00005 25 17.49 0.99943 -0.00057 0.00390 0.00002 
26 17.64 1.00858 0.00854 0.01301 0.00017 27 17.77 1.00737 0.00734 0.01182 0.00014 28 17.97 1.01125 0.01119 0.01567 0.00025 29 17.56 0.97718 -0.02308 -0.01861 0.00035 
30 17.40 0.99089 -0.00915 -0.00468 0.00002 
1. Calculate ratio of daily price changes 2. Convert to natural logs 
3. Calculate mean of log price changes 4. Subtract mean from daily logs 5. Square the result 
6. Sum the squares 
7. Divide sum by 29 
root 
9. Multiply by Sq root(256) -0.00447 0.00448 
0.00015 
0.01242 
Annualised volatility = 19.88% � � 
� 
� 
� 8. Take square 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 9

--- Page 468/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
7.	take the square root of the result to obtain the stan-
dard deviation, 
8.	multiply the standard deviation by the square root of 
256 (the number of business days in the year) to obtain the annualised price volatility
. 
In order to keep track of the changing level of price volatil-
ity in the market, options traders use computer programs to cal-culate and plot a continuously moving measure of price volatility over a variety of different historical time periods. The most com-monly used are 5, 10, 20 and 30 days. As can be seen from Fig. 9.19, historical price volatility in the oil market is far from con-stant and, in the case of Nymex WTI, 30 day historical volatility has varied from 10 per cent to over 35 per cent since January 1992. 
Other, more elaborate, calculations of historical price volatil-
ity make use of open, high and low as well as closing prices to capture the intra-day price volatility experienced by the market. Calculating implied volatility Implied volatility is the market’s estimate of future price volatil-ity, which is embedded in the option premium. It can be calcu-lated using one of a number of option pricing models. The most 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 120% 
l l Jan-97 Jul-97 Jan-98 Ju -98 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Ju l-00 Jan-01 Ju -01 Annualised volatility 10 day 30 day 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.19 Historical price volatility , nearby WTI futures 
9.4/page 10	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 469/964 ---
9 Options
frequently used model was developed in 1973 by Fischer Black* and Myron Scholes and is known as the Black–Scholes model. 
The Black–Scholes model applies to European call options. 
The Black–Scholes model requires ﬁve inputs – the current 
price, the strike price, time to expiration, the risk free interest rate, and the future price volatility of the market – in order to calculate the “fair” premium for a call option (see Fig. 9.20). 4 of the 5 inputs can be easily obtained from the market. The ﬁfth input – future price volatility – must be estimated. However
, 
the market’s view of volatility – implied volatility – can be derived from the call option premium using the Black–Scholes model. 
Instead of using future volatility as an input to the model to compute the premium, the calculation is performed in reverse and the premium is used to obtain the implied market volatility. 
The relationship between market volatility and option prices 
can be seen in T
able 9.4. This shows how the premium for a $16 
at-the-money European call option for Brent crude rises with increasing market volatility. The higher the volatility, the higher the option premium. 
Higher volatility implies that prices will trade in a greater 
range over time, which is why the option premium is also higher
. 
Figure 9.21 shows the expected trading range assuming volatili-ties of 20 and 30 per cent. Prices are expected to trade in the range between the lower and upper conﬁdence limits – i.e. ± one 
standard deviation – 68 per cent of the time, and outside these limits the remaining 32 per cent of the time. 
Table 9.4 Effect of volatility on option prices, $/barrel $16 at the money option, 30 days left to expiry 
Market volatility Calls Puts 
15% 0.25 0.25 
20% 0.31 0.31 
25% 0.46 0.46 
30% 0.55 0.55 
35% 0.67 0.67 
* Black, F. & Scholes, M. (1973), The pricing of options and corpo-
rate liabilities, Journal of Political Economy , 81, pp 637–659. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 11

--- Page 470/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
i
i
Ti Time to expiry 
Ri RiCall premium Implied volatility 
INPUTS OUTPUT INPUTS OUTPUT 
Market pr ce Market price 
Str ke price Strike price 
me to expiry Call Implied price 
premium volatility 
Future price Call 
volatility premium 
sk-free sk-free 
rate rate 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.20 Using the Black–Scholes option pricing model 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Til i
i
i  l ls 
i
14.00 14.50 15.00 15.50 16.00 16.50 17.00 17.50 18.00 
me elapsed, days Market price, $/barreStart ng price 
20% v olat lity 
30% v olatility 
Upper pr ce eve
Lower pr ce levels 
Source: Standard Bank London Ltd 
Figure 9.21 Effect of volatility on market trading range 
Calculating the expected trading range 
Starting price: $16.00/barrel 
Expected volatility: 20% 
Assume 256 trading days in year. 
To calculate the expected trading range over a period of 1 day:
9.4/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 471/964 ---
9 Options
1. Take the square root of 256 days divided by 1 day, 
√
(256/1) = 16, 
2. Divide the expected volatility by the result of step 1, 
20% ∏ 16 = 1.25%, 
3. Multiply the starting price by the result of step 2, 
$16 ¥ 1.25% = 0.20/barrel 
4. The expected trading range over a 1 day period is there-
fore: 
$16 ± 0.20/barrel 
T
o calculate the expected trading range over a period of 1 week: 
1. Take the square root of 256 days divided by 5 days,
√
(256/5) = 7.1554,
2. Divide the expected volatility by the result of step 1,
20% ∏ 7.1554 = 2.795%,
3. Multiply the starting price by the result of step 2, 
$16 ¥ 2.795% = 0.4472/barrel, 
4. The expected trading range over a week is therefore: 
$16 ± 0.45/barrel 
T
o calculate the expected trading range over a period of 1 month: 
1. Take the square root of 256 days divided by 20 days,
√
(256/20) = 3.5777,
2. Divide the expected volatility by the result of step 1,
20% ∏ 3.5777 = 5.590%,
3. Multiply the starting price by the result of step 2, 
$16 ¥ 5.590% = 0.8944/barrel, 
4. The expected trading range over a month is therefore: 
$16 ± 0.89/barrel 
Supplement 8 May 2002 9.4/page 13

--- Page 472/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 473/964 ---
Appendix 9.1 Jet fuel option indication, price cap 
Option Type:
Option Style:
Option Buyer:
Option Seller:
Commodities:
Reference Price:
Start Date:
End Date:
Price Assessment:
Quantity:
Cap Strike Price:
Premium:
Payments:
Price Cap Asian 
Airline Standard Bank 
Jet Fuel 
PlattsMarketScan assessment 
for Jet Kero CIF NWE Cargoes 1 July 2001 31 Dec 2001 
Monthly 
“X” barrels per month 
$“X”/barrel 
$“X”/barrel Cash settlement within 5 business 
days of each month end. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 9.1/page 1

--- Page 474/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 475/964 ---
Appendix 9.2 Jet fuel option indication, zero premium collar 
Option Type:
Option Style:
Option Buyer:
Option Seller:
Commodities:
Reference Price:
Start Date:
End Date:
Price Assessment:
Quantity:
Cap Strike Price:
Floor Strike Price:
Premium:
Payments:
Zero premium collar Asian 
Airline Standard Bank 
Jet Fuel 
PlattsMarketScan assessment 
for Jet Kero CIF NWE Cargoes 1 July 2001 31 Dec 2001 
Monthly 
“X” barrels per month 
$“X”/barrel $“X”/barrel 
Zero Cash settlement within 5 business 
days of each month end. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 9.2/page 1

--- Page 476/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 477/964 ---
10Swaps 
David Long 
10.1 Introduction 
10.2 What is a swap? 
10.2.1 Swap contracts 
10.22 Regulation 
10.2.3 Market structure 
10.3 Pricing swaps 
10.3.1 Replicating swaps with futures 
10.3.2 Term structure of prices 
10.3.3 Basis risk 
10.3.4 Credit risk 
10.3.5 Sources of price information 
10.4 Using swaps 
10.4.1 Short-term swaps 
10.4.2 Long-term swaps 
10.4.3 Over-the-counter (Ul'C) options 
10.5 Future developments

--- Page 478/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 479/964 ---
10.1 Introduction 
Swaps are a relatively new form of "over-the-counter" (OTC) 
derivative trading instrument that has proved to be ideally suited 
to the complexities of the oil market. They were first introduced 
into financial markets in the early 1980s where they were used to 
hedge interest rate risks. But it was soon realised that the same 
instrument could be used to transfer price risks for any asset, and 
swaps spread rapidly to the commodity markets, including oil. With 
them came new players such as the banks, who were seeking 
opportunities to diversif17 their investment activities and to apply 
their recently-acquired financial engineering skills. 
The attraction of swaps is three-fold. First, they are purely 
financial transactions and can therefore be traded without 
incurring the quality risks and other delivery problems normally 
associated with physical oil contracts. Secondly, they offer the 
prospect of the "perfect hedge" since they can be tailored exactly to 
meet the requirements of each participant. And, thirdly, and most 
importantly, they can be traded far into the future since they are 
not constrained by the more limited time-horizons of existing 
futures or forward markets. Swaps therefore provide a uniquely 
flexible means of filling the gaps in the oil market left by other 
trading instruments. As a result, the oil swaps business has grown 
rapidly over the past few years. 
Swaps are now firmly established as an integal part of the oil 
market. Short-term swaps hm7e evohed from being largely private 
transactions between companies to become a more standardised 
and transparent form of trading instisument that is widely used as a 
substitute for forward paper contracts, many of which have now 
been displaced by swaps (see Chapter 7). Negotiating long-term 
swaps is still more time consuming than using other oil trading 
instruments, which can sometimes provide the same degree of risk 
protection at a lower cost. Companies are also exposed to credit 
risks that can be difficult to control. But, despite these problems, 
swaps have made an important contribution to the oil market and 
are here to stay. 
Over the past ten years, the OTC market in oil has grown 
rapidly. As well as swaps, which are the simplest form of OTC 
financial derivative instrument, companies can also trade OTC 
options (e.g. caps, collars and floors), swaptions (an option which is 
exercised into a swap), and a wide range of more exotic derivative 
structures which can be tailored to suit the needs of each company. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 lO.l/page 1

--- Page 480/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 481/964 ---
10.2 What is a swap? 
A swap is a purely financial transaction that is designed to transfer 
price risk. It is a private agreement between two parties to 
exchange cash at pre-arranged dates in the future according to an 
agreed pricing formula. It guarantees the swap user (who is risk 
averse) a fmed price for a specified asset over an agreed time period 
in the future and assigns any profit (or lossj that might arise as a 
result of subsequent price changes to the swap provider (who is a 
risk taker). It can be applied to any asset for which a mutually 
acceptable pricing mechanism can be established and, since it does 
not involve delivery, leaves the swap user free to make separate 
arrangements for the physical disposal of the asset. 
In some ways swaps are very similar to futures contracts. Both 
involve an agreement to buy or sell a specified quantity and quality 
of oil (or any other commodity) at a particular location and date in 
the future at a fmed price agreed at the time the contract is 
negotiated. And both can be used to hedge price risks created as a 
result of positions held in the physical oil market, or to speculate 
over the future course of prices. But., although the objectives may 
be similar, the operation of the two types of contract is very 
different and has led to an entirely different market structure and 
regulatory environment for swaps. 
10.2.1 Swap contracts 
Fixed for fZoatii2g 
A typical swap contract involves two linked transactions. First, 
there is an agreement for the swap provider to buy (or sell) a 
particular quantity of the underlying asset from the swap user at a 
fixed price over a specified future time period. And, secondly, there 
is an agreement for the swap user to sell (or buyj back the quantity 
of the same asset over the same time period fi-om the swap provider 
at a floating price, which can be determined by any mutually 
acceptable set of rules. 
The two notional transactions are necessary to eliminate any 
requirement to deliver. the asset. But as the same parties are 
involved on both sides of the two transactions, the contract is 
actually settled by paying the difference between the fixed price 
and the floating price to whichever party has gained overall. For 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 109fpage 1

--- Page 482/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
28 
-Nearby WTI futures 
26 - Calendar 98 swaps 
24 
-e 2 22etff 
20 
18 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 
Source: Nymex, lntercapital 
Figure 10.1 Nearby WTI futures and calendar 98 swaps prices 
this reason, swaps are also known as "fixed for floating agreements" 
or "contracts for differences'". 
For example, an oil producer who is concerned about the risk 
of lower oil prices over the next six months could use a price swap 
to fm the price of all or part of his output for that period. Like 
hedging with a futures contract, this involves two parallel sets of 
transactions, one paper and one physical, in which the profits (or 
losses) from the paper transaction are used to offset any losses (or 
gains) on the physical transaction. 
In this case the paper transaction is the swap agreement, 
which specifies that the producer will: 
(a) sell a certain number of barrels of his particular grade of crude 
oil each month to the swap provider at an agreed fixed price, 
and, 
(b) buy back the same quantity and quality of oil at the same time 
at a market related price determined according to an agreed 
formula. If the formula price 
 exceeds the fixed price, the producer pays 
the difference to the swaps provider, while, if the formula price is 
less than the fixed price, the swaps provider pays the difference to 
Brent CFDs are in fact a "contract for differences" -i.e. a price 
swap -based on the price differential between dated Brent and a specified 
forward delivery month for Brent crude. 
10.2lpage 2 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 483/964 ---
10 Swaps 
the producer. Any profits (or losses) which the swap user makes on 
the swap contract are then used to offset any losses (or gains) that 
arise because of changes in the market price when the producer 
actually sells his oil on the physical oil market. In this way the 
producer ends up with the equivalent of a fixed price for his oil over 
the entire period. 
Exa.rnpEe: WTI producer, one yeur hedge 
A small WTI producer wants to take advantage of high oil prices 
during the fourth quarter of 1997 to lock in a good price for part of 
his next year's production in case prices collapse. He decides in 
mid-October 1997 that prices have peaked and agrees a price swap 
to sell 1,000 b/d at the current swap market price of $20.50/barrel 
for the whole of 1998 (see Fig. 10.1). 
The structure of the swap deal is as follows: 
(1)The producer agrees to sell 1,000 b/d of WTI to the swap dealer 
at a fixed price of $20.50/barrel throughout 1998, 
(2) The producer agrees to buy back the same quantity from the 
swap dealer at a floating price based on the quarterly average 
settlement price for the nearby Nymex WTI futures contract, 
(3) Payments are to be made quarterly within five business days of 
the end of the quarter based on the difference between the 
agreed fmed price of $20.50/barrel and the value of the price 
index. If the index pi-ice is higher than the fixed price, the 
producer pays the swap dealer. If the index price is lower than 
the fmed price the swap dealer pays the producer. 
In 1998, the producer sells his actual output in the physical 
market at market prices, which, combined with the net value of the 
payments from the swap deal, provides him with the fixed price 
guaranteed by the swap deal. 
The net payments to (+) or by (-1 the producer in the swap deal 
are as follows (98Q4 is a forecast): 
Period WTI Fixed Price Quantity Payments 
price price difference (bls) ($1 
98Q1 15.95 20.50 +4.55 90,000 +409,500 
98Q2 14.69 20.50 +5.81 91,000 +528,710 
98Q3 14.15 20.50 +6.35 92,000 +584,200 
98Q4 14.00 20.50 +6.50 92,000 +598,000 
1998 14.69 20.50 +5.81 365.000 +2,120.410 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 103lpage 3

--- Page 484/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
And, the receipts from the sale of WTI in the physical oil 
market are: 
Period WTI Quantity Receipts 
price (bls) ($1 
98Q1 15.95 90,000 1,435,500 
98Q2 14.69 91,000 1,336,790 
98Q3 14.15 92,000 1,301,800 
98Q4 14.00 92,000 1,288,000 
1998 14.69 365,000 5,362,090 
The combined proceeds from the swap deal and the physical 
sales are therefore: 
Period Sales Swap Total Quantity Price 
proceeds proceeds proceeds sold achieved 
($) ($1 ($1 (bls) ($W 
98Q1 1,435,500 +409,500 1,845,000 90,000 20.50 
98Q2 1,336,790 +528,710 1,865,500 91,000 20.50 
9863 1,301,800 +584,200 1,886,000 92,000 20.50 
98Q4 1,288,000 +598,000 1,886,000 92,000 20.50 
1998 5.362.090 +2.120.410 7.482.500 365.000 20.50 
Thus, the producer achieves the target price of $20.50/barrel 
for his output in 1998, compared with an annual average price of 
$14.69/barrel, which he would have received if he had not entered 
into the swap. In this case the swap price turned out to be higher 
than the actual market price since oil prices collapsed in 1998. But 
prices could have risen sharply as they did in 1996. Either way, the 
producer can be sure of receiving an average price of $20.5O/barrel 
for his cmde -whatever happens to market prices in 1998. 
Tailor-made hedges 
Although the principle is the same as hedging with a futures 
contract, swaps are much more flexible since there are no 
constraints on the quantity, quality, timing, and delivery terms of 
the underlying commodity. Companies using swaps to hedge can 
specify any amount, grade, time period, or delivery arrangement for 
the oil and can use any form of price marker that they think is 
suitable for the task. As a result, it is possible for companies not 
only to reduce the basis risk that limits the effectiveness of futures 
contracts for hedging, but also to extend the trading horizon of the 
market far beyond the time limits imposed by existing futures 
markets. Swaps therefore provide an instrument that can be used 
10.2lpage 4 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 485/964 ---
10 Swaps 
28 
. . . . . . . Dated Forties 
26 nearby WIfutures 
-WTI swaps inexin quarters) 
24 
-
a, z 22e ea 
20 
18 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Now Dec 
97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 
1 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Nymex & lntercapital 
Figure 10.2 Dated Forties, WTI futures and swaps prices 
to fill many of the gaps that are left in the oil market by other 
instruments such as forward and futures contracts. 
For example, companies producing grades of crude oil that are 
not traded on the futures market can use swaps to fix the price of 
their output with much greater accuracy than can be achieved with 
a futures contract as long as they can find an alternative price 
marker that can be relied upon to track the price of their particular 
grade of crude oil. In most cases companies use prices published by 
one or more of the larger price reporting services such as Argus or 
Platt’s as the basis for the floating price in the swap agreement as 
these are generally accepted as being both independent and 
representative of market trends. But any pricing mechanism can be 
used that is both visible and acceptable to the parties involved. 
Example: North Sea producer, six month hedge 
A North Sea Forties producer is concerned about rapidly falling oil 
prices in the first quarter of 1997 and wants to take advantage of a 
favourable price differential for his grade of crude to lock in a price 
for the next six months' production (see Fig. 10.2). 
He decides in early March 1991 that the FortiesWTI 
differential is now very favourable and that oil prices are unlikely 
to recover in the short term and agrees a price swap to sell 1,000 
b/d of Forties crude at a discount of $1.20/barrel to the current WTI 
swap market price of $20.20ibarrel for the period April to 
September 1997. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 109fpage 5

--- Page 486/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
The structure of the swap deal is as follows: 
(1)The producer agrees to sell 1,000 b/d of Forties to the swap 
dealer at a fured price of $19.00/barrel from April to September 
1997, 
(2) The producer agrees to buy back the same quantity from the 
swap dealer at a floating price based on the monthly average 
dated Forties price assessment reported by Argus for each 
calendar month, 
(3) Payments are to be made monthly within five business days of 
the end of each month based on the difference between the 
agreed fixed price of $19.00/barrel and the value of the price 
index. If the index price is higher than the fixed price, the 
producer pays the swap dealer. If the index price is lower than 
the fixed price the swap dealer pays the producer. 
As before, the producer sells his actual output during the 
summer of 1997 on the physical market at market prices, which, 
combined with the net value of the payments from the swap deal, 
provides him with the fixed price guaranteed by the swap deal. 
The net payments to (+) or by (-1 the producer from the swap 
deal are as follows: 
Period Forties Fixed Price Quantity Payments 
price price difference (bls) ($1 
Apr 97 17.55 19.00 1.45 30,000 43,500 
May 97 19.44 19.00 -0.44 31,000 -13,547 
Jun 97 17.71 19.00 1.29 30,000 38,640 
Jul97 18.90 19.00 0.10 31,000 3,193 
Aug 97 19.01 19.00 -0.01 31,000 -248 
scp 97 18.79 19.00 0.22 30,000 6,450 
2QI3Q97 18.57 19.00 0.43 183,000 77,988 
The combined proceeds from the swap deal and the physical 
sales are therefore: 
Period Sales Swap Total Quantity Price 
proceeds proceeds proceeds sold achieved 
($4 ($, ($, (bls) ($hU 
Apr 97 526,500 43,500 570,000 30,000 19.00 
May 97 602,547 -13,547 589,000 31,000 19.00 
lJun 97 531,360 38,640 570,000 30,000 19.00 
Jul97 585,807 3,193 589,000 31,000 19.00 
Aug 97 589,248 -248 589,000 31,000 19.00 
Sep 97 563,550 6,450 570,000 30,000 19.00 
2Ql3Q97 3,399,012 77,988 3,477,000 183,000 19.00 
lO.2/page 6 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 487/964 ---
10 Swaps 
Thus, the producer achieves the target price of $19.00/barrel 
for part of his Forties output in the summer of 1997, compared with 
an average price of $18.57harrel which he would have received if 
he had not entered into the swap deal. 
Longer-term hedges 
A crude producer can also use swaps to fix the price of his output 
over a much longer time period, five or ten years ahead, thus 
hedging his price risk well beyond the time horizon of even the WTI 
futures market. Such long term price swaps are particularly 
attractive to producers seeking finance to develop a new oil field 
since they can eliminate the risk that prices may fall below the 
level of their costs and so obtain better financial terms for their 
investment funds. In such cases the natural counterpart for the 
swap deal may actually be the bank which is lending the money 
since the bank may also be active in the swaps market and 
therefore interested in linking the two transactions in its 
investment portfolio. 
Example: WTI producer, fiveyear hedge 
A WTI producer decided to take advantage of the high oil prices at 
the end of the first quarter of 1995 to lock in a price for a further 
part of his production for five years. 
He therefore agreed a price swap to sell 1,000 b/d at the then 
current swap market prices for each of the five calendar years from 
1.996 to 2000 (see Fig. 10.3): 
Time Swaps 
period price 
Cal '96 17.95 
Cal '97 18.25 
Cal '98 18.65 
Cal '99 19.15 
Cal '00 19.73 
The structure of the swap deal is as follows: 
(1)The producer agrees to sell 1,000 b/d of WTI to the swap dealer 
at an agreed fixed price for each of the five calendar years 
starting in 1996 and ending in 2000, 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 109fpage 7

--- Page 488/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
A Cal ’01 
A Cal ’00 
A Cal ’99 
~ Nyrnex WTI forward cum 
14 
~ A WTI Calendar Swaps 
Nearby WTI actual price 
12-1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 
Source: Nymex, lntercapital 
Figure 10.3 Long-term WTI swaps prices, 31 March 1995 
(2)The producer agrees to buy back the same quantity from the 
swap dealer at a floating price based on the quarterly average 
settlement price for the nearby Nymex WTI futures contract, 
(3) Payments are to be made quarterly within five business days of 
the end of each quarter based on the difference between the 
agreed fixed price for each calendar year and the value of the 
price index. If the index price is higher than the fixed price, 
the producer pays the swap dealer. If the index price is lower, 
the swap dealer pays the producer. 
At the same time the producer sells his actual output in the 
physical oil market at current market prices, which, combined with 
the net value of the payments from the swap deal, provides him 
with the fixed price guaranteed by the swap deal. 
In practice, oil prices rose sharply in 1996 after companies ran 
down stocks and the resumption of Iraqi oil exports was delayed, 
and then remained higher than the agreed swap price for most of 
1997 (see Fig. 10.3). But oil prices collapsed in 1998 as Asia slipped 
unexpectedly into recession, triggering a massive stockbuild, and 
seem unlikely to recover strongly before the end of the swap 
contract. 
Using actual prices to the end of October 1998 -and the 
forward curve from mid-November 1998 to value the remainder of 
the contract -the net annual payments to (+) or by (-) the 
producer from the swap deal would be: 
10.2tpage 8 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 489/964 ---
10 Swaps 
Period WTI Fixed Price Quantity Payments 
price price difference (bls) ($1 
1996 22.03 17.95 4.08 366,000 -1,493,280 
1997 20.61 18.25 -2.36 365,000 -861,400 
1998 14.69 18.65 +3.96 365,000 1,445,400 
1999 15.00 19.15 +4.15 365,000 1,514,750 
2000 1 6.50 19.73 +3.23 366,000 1,182,180 
1996-2000 17.77 18.75 +0.98 1,827,000 1,787,650 
The combined annual proceeds from the swap deal and the 
physical sales are therefore: 
Period Sales Swap Total Quantity Price 
proceeds proceeds proceeds sold achieved -
($> ($> ($1 (bls) ($hU 
1996 8.062.980 -1,493.280 6.569.700 366,000 17.95 
1997 7,522,650 -861,400 6,661,250 365,000 18.25 
1998 5,361,850 1,445,400 6,807,250 365,000 18.65 
1999 5,475,000 1,514,750 6,989,750 365,000 19.15 
2000 6,039,000 1,182,180 7,221,180 366,000 19.73 
1996-2000 32,461,480 1,787,650 34,249,130 1,827,000 18.75 
Thus, the producer achieves an average price of $18.75/barrel 
for his output over the five year period from 1996 to 2000, 
compared with the projected average price of $17.77/barrel which 
he might have received if he had not entered into the swap deal. 
The swap deal illustrates very effectively the huge uncertainties 
associated with oil prices over a five-year' period and the large 
variations in cashflow which can occur between the two parties. 
When the deal was done, the swap prices looked favourable, 
but the producer. had to make large payments to the swap provider 
in the first two years because oil prices rose unexpectedly. The 
cashflows were reversed in 1998 when prices fell sharply and the 
swap provider had to pay the producer, and the deal now looks 
profitable for the producer again. Of cowrse if prices recover more 
strongly than expected in 1999 and 2000, the producer might not 
necessarily be better off. Howeveis, whatever happens to oil prices 
over the five year period, he can be sure of getting $18.75/bai2rel for 
his output as a result of the swap deal. 
Trading flexibility 
As can be seen fi-om the three examples given above, there is no 
limit (other than the imagination of the parties involved) to the 
number of different applications that can be devised for swaps. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 109fpage 9

--- Page 490/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Because they are so flexible, they have proved to be a particularly 
useful form of trading instrument for the oil market, which suffers 
more from the problem of basis risk than other commodity markets. 
As a result, they have not only increased the diversity of contracts 
available in the short-term oil market, but also extended the 
trading horizon of the oil market far into the future. 
10.2.2 Regulation 
At present swaps operate in a much looser regulatory environment 
than futures contracts since they are regarded as commercial 
transactions that are not available to the general public (see 
Chapter 17). In the United States they were awarded a special 
exempt status by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
(CFTC) in 1989 under the terms of the Commodity Exchange Act 
(CEA). While in the United Kingdom they qualify for self-regulation 
under the terms of the Financial Services Act (FSA) 1986. 
As a result, the swaps market has been able to grow rapidly 
since it is not subject to the kind of regulatory delays that 
characterise futures contracts and there are few constraints on the 
pace of innovation as long as companies do not introduce 
modifications that would compromise the basic characteristics of a 
swap agreement (see below). The initiative for ensuring that this 
does not happen has been taken by the International Swaps and 
Derivatives Association (ISDA), which has drafted a model "Master 
Agreement" that satisfies the current legislative controls and can be 
used as the basis for all swap transactions. 
The ISDA Master Agreement is widely used in the industry 
since it also enables companies to pool their mutual exposures 
through a "netting" clause. Without netting each transaction would 
stand alone and a company might find that it had to pay money 
owed to a bankrupt counterparty under one contract while being 
unable to reclaim money owed by the same company under another 
contract. With netting, the two contracts can be considered together 
and the company would only have to pay the net amount owed to 
the bankrupt counterparty. ISDA has also been instrumental in 
persuading an increasing number of countries to incorporate the 
principle of netting in national legislation by promoting its "Model 
Netting Act". 
There is, however, a basic tension between the US and UK 
regulatory regimes which still overshadows the development of the 
swaps market and explains why the market has expanded faster 
outside the US. According to the CFTC, swaps must satisfy six 
criteria if they are to be exempt from the provisions of the CEA: 
lO.2/page 10 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 491/964 ---
10 Swaps 
they must be settled in cash, 
they must be individually tailored and not subject to a 
standardised form of agreement, 
there must be no system of offset as might be provided by a 
futures exchange: 
there must be no central clearing 01-margining system, 
the transaction must be undertaken as part of the parties' 
line of business, 
swaps must not be marketed to the general public. 
In the eyes of the US regulatory regime, swaps therefore differ 
substantially from futures contracts which, according to the CFTC 
have four key features: 
they are standardised contracts for future delivery of the 
commodity, they are directly 
or indirectly offered to the general public, 
they are generally secured by earnest money or margins, 
they are used primarily for the purpose of assuming or 
shifting the risk of the change of value of commodities. 
In addition, the CFTC observes that most futures contracts are 
offset before the delivery date. 
However, the CFTC is coming under increasing pressure to 
tighten the regulations governing swaps and other OTC 
instruments. Concern over accounting standards and the financial 
exposure of companies engaged in trading derivatives has prompted 
calls for stricter capital standards and greater disclosure in annual 
reports. And the US General Accounting Office (GAO) report 
released in May 1994 recommended ending the current exemption 
of OTC derivatives and swaps from federal regulations. 
The GAO report concluded that the rapid growth in derivatives 
trade among smaller. firms was a possible threat to the integrity of 
the US financial system since they ma.y not have enough capital to 
sustain sizeable losses. The report also found that current 
accounting standards are incomplete and inconsistent and have not 
kept pace with business practices and recommended co-ordination 
between US and foreign regulators to create international 
derivatives trading standards. 
Until recently, the US regulatory authorities rejected the calls 
for new legislation, arguing that steps have already been taken to 
ensure that only well-capitalised fxms engage in derivatives 
trading. But the CFTC is now proposing to carry out a review of the 
OTC market in order to see whether or not further controls are 
required. The proposed CTFC review has provoked a storm of 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Sfpage 11

--- Page 492/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
protest from market participants and financial organisations -
including ISDA -and exposed differences of opinion between the 
CFTC and the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) over 
how OTC markets should be regulated. Legislation to prevent the 
CFTC from regulating OTC derivatives is being prepared by the US 
Senate: and Congress is due to consider the issues in 1999. But the 
debate is far from over and new controls may yet have to be 
introduced in order t.o satisfy the critics. 
10.2.3 Market structure 
The private and bilateral nature of swap agreements means that 
the structure and organisation of the swaps market is more like a 
forward paper market than the futures market. 
Although they are extremely flexible trading instruments, and 
therefore potentially very attractive to hedgers in the oil market, 
they are not inherently transparent since it can be difficult to 
compare the terms of different deals and parties may not be keen to 
divulge the details. In addition, the lack of any central clearing 
house or margining system, and the long-term nature of some swap 
agreements, creates credit risks which can affect the relative price 
of even very similar agreements. 
However, like forward paper contracts, which swaps have 
largely replaced, the need for liquidity has encouraged swap 
providers and users to focus on a small number of standardised 
swap Contracts that are actively traded, enabling market makers to 
operate effectively and raising the level of price transparency in the 
swaps market. In addition, some swaps brokers have been 
instrumental in promoting the wider dissemination of price 
information in order to encourage new players into the market. 
The key players in the swaps market are the swap providers 
who are prepared to shoulder the price risk (see Fig. 10.4). These 
include a wide variety of companies: banks, commodity traders, oil 
companies and dedicated swap providers. In order to trade 
successfully such companies require good credit lines and an 
effective means of managing the risk. 
Ideally, swaps providers would like to run a balanced book, 
acting purely as an intermediary who matches buyers to sellers in 
order to offset the risk. But this is not always possible in practice 
and so swaps providers must be prepared to "warehouse" the risk 
and use other trading instruments such as futures and options to 
limit their exposure. Alternatively, swaps providers may be oil 
companies who are using swaps to balance their existing exposure 
as net sellers or net buyers in the physical market. 
lO.Z/page 12 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 493/964 ---
10 Swaps 
FUTURES 
MARKET 
HEDGES SWAPS7-
FLOATING PRICE 
PRODUCER CONSUMER 
FIXED PRICE FlXEO PRICE 
SELLS AT MARKET PRICE BUYS AT MARKET PRICE * 
PHYSICAL OIL MARKET 
Figure 10.4 Structure of the swaps market 
In practice, many swap deals are ultimately hedged on the 
forward and futures markets, as is demonstrated by the expansion 
in the liquidity of the back months in the major futures markets, 
leaving the swap providers to manage the residual basis and credit 
risks associated with each individual deal. 
The balance of players in the swaps market depends on the 
time-scale of the swap contract. Over the past year or so, oil 
companies have come to play an increasingly important role in the 
short-term swaps market, reducing the need for market-makers to 
facilitate transactions by warehousing the risk. 
Short-term swaps are now widely traded directly between oil 
companies with offsetting positions in the physical market and 
swap markets for some refined products have become so 
standardised that they are now widely used as an alternative to 
forward or futures contracts. 
Long-term swaps, however, remain less standardised and 
market-makers continue to p1a.y an important role in negotiating 
contracts and transferring the risk (see Chapter 11). Since some 
long-term swap contracts are tied to investment projects it is not 
surprising that banks are active in this market. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Sfpage 13

--- Page 494/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 495/964 ---
10.3 Pricing swaps 
Arbitrage relationships between the swap and forward or futures 
markets create the basic framework for determining the price of a 
swap. In addition, there are other, less tangible, components to the 
swap price that are determined partly by the market and partly by 
the nature of the parties involved. 
Generally speaking, the price of a swap depends on three main 
factors: 
0 the cost of hedging the swap position, 
0 the credit rating of the swap user, and 
0 the margin required by the swap provider. 
However, by far the most important of these is the cost of hedging 
the position created by the swap agreement. This, in turn, depends 
partly on the term structure of the forward or futures market being 
used to hedge the price risk, partly on the different payment 
structures, and partly on the basis risk associated with the hedging 
instrument. 
Although other factors, such as the credit rating of the swap 
user and the margin required by the swap provider do play a role, 
their significance has diminished as the market becomes more 
liquid and the level of competition between the swaps providers has 
intensified. 
10.3.1 Replicating swaps with futures 
The basic principles of swap pricing are quite sti~aightfoi~ward. In 
theoretical terms, a swap agreement is equivalent to holding a 
portfolio of foisward or futures contracts and arbitrage will therefore 
ensure that the price ultimately reflects this. 
For example, a simple swap agreement between an oil 
producer. and a swap provideis to sell a specified quantity of crude 
oil at a fixed price over a period of one year can be reproduced as a 
discounted portfolio of short futures contiwts equivalent to the 
same volume of oil fois each of the de1iveiZ.y months nominated in the 
contract. The floating part of the agreement is then reproduced by 
buying back a daily (pro-rata) stream of futures contracts 
throughout each delivery month. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.3Ipage 1

--- Page 496/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Example: Replicating swaps using futures 
Arbitrage between the swaps market and the forward and futures 
markets ensures that swaps are priced as if they were equivalent to 
holding a portfolio of forward or futures contracts. In cases where 
the swap is based on an actively traded futures contract, the price 
relationship is clear and the same result can be obtained using the 
futures market as long as the swap user is prepared to manage the 
resulting portfolio of contracts. 
For example, the WTI producer in the example above could 
replicate the one year price swap by selling a portfolio of Nymex 
WTI contracts for nearby delivery months throughout 1998 in mid- 
October 1997 and then buying them back as the year unwinds. The 
fixed price is established by creating a weighted discounted 
portfolio of nearby contracts that are equivalent to the volume the 
producer is trying to hedge, in this case 1,000 b/d for calendar 1998. 
The mix of contracts required to replicate the swap is determined 
by the number of trading days in each month, the roll-over dates 
for the nearby futures contract, and the payment schedule agreed 
under the swaps contract. 
For example, there are 20 trading days in January 1998 
(January 1 and 19 are Nymex holidays), and the last trading day 
for the nearby February contract is January 20. After this date the 
nearby contract becomes March. As a result, the February contract 
trades for 12 days during January and the March contract trades 
for 8 days. 
Calendar Calendar Trading Division of Number Contract 
month days days contracts due to of month 
rollover dates contracts 
?Jan-98 31 20 12 8 19 Feh-98 
Fcb-98 28 19 14 5 33 Mar-98 
Mar-98 81 22 15 7 28 Apr-98 
Apr-98 30 21 14 7 30 May-98 
May-98 81 20 18 7 80 .Jun-98 
Jun-98 30 22 16 6 33 Jul-98 
rJd-98 81 22 14 8 28 AUK-98 
Aug-98 3 1 21 14 7 3 2 Sep-98 
scp-98 30 21 15 6 32 Oct-98 
Oct-98 3 1 22 14 8 28 NOV-98 
Nov-98 30 19 15 4 35 Dcc-98 
Dec-98 31 22 15 7 27 Jan-99 
10 Fcb-99 
TOTALS 365 251 171 80 365 
10.3tpage 2 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 497/964 ---
10 Swaps 
Thus: the producer will need to sell 12/20 x 31 = 18.6 February 
contracts and 8/20 x 31 = 12.4 March contracts to fix the price of 
1,000 b/d of his calendar day output in January 1998. As it is not 
possible to sell fractions of a 1,000 barrel contract he will need to 
round up (or down) to obtain an exact multiple of contracts. In 
order to identify the total number of contracts for the whole of 1998, 
the same calculation must be carried out for each month and the 
results must then be discounted to reflect the different payment 
schedule for the swap contract. 
Futures contracts are marked to market every day but the 
swap contract is to be settled within five business days of the end of 
each quarter. As a result, fewer futures contracts are initially 
required to replicate the swaps contract since the present value of 
the swap contract in each quarter must be discounted back from 
the future payment dates. This is also known as “delta“ hedging. 
For example, the discount factor for the portfolio of futures 
contracts required to replicate the first quarter swap depends on 
the current interest rate (r) and the time (t)left before payment is 
required: 
Discount factor = ed 
If the first quarter 1998 swap is being replicated in mid-October 
1997, the time left before payment is 140 days, i.e. the 45 days 
remaining until the end of the 1997, the 90 days in the first quarter 
of 1998 and the 5 days grace after the end of the first quarter before 
payment is required. Assuming the relevant interest rate is 5%, the 
discount factor is calculated as follows: 
Discount factor = e-0.05”(140/365) = 0.981 
Thus the nominal number of futures contracts required to hedge 
the first quarter swap must be reduced by a factor of 0.981. Similar 
calculations are required for the second, third and fourth quarters. 
Contract Nominal Discount Discounted 
month contracts factor contracts 
Feb-98 19 0.981 19 
Mar-98 33 0.981 32 
Apr-98 28 0.981 27 
May-98 10 0.981 10 
1Q98 90 88 
The current market value of the resulting portfolio of 
“discounted” contracts can then be established by obtaining bids 
(and asks) from the futures market and calculating a weighted 
average price for the quarter: 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.3Ipage 3

--- Page 498/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Contract Discounted Market 
month contracts Price 
($/barrel) 
Feb-98 19 20.99 
Mar-98 32 20.90 
Apr-98 27 20.81 
May-98 10 20.72 
1898 88 
Average price = ((19*20.99)+(32"20.90)+(27*20.81)+(10*20.72))/88 
i.e. 1Q98 weighted average price= $20.87/barrel 
Combining this result with similar calculations for the second, third 
and fourth quarters will give the weighted average price for the 
year as a whole: 
Contract Nominal Discount Discounted Market price 
month contracts factor contracts ($/barrel) 
Feb-98 19 0.981 19 20.99 
Mar-98 33 0.981 32 20.90 
Apr-98 28 0.981 27 20.81 
May-98 10 0.981 10 20.72 
lQ98 90 88 20.87 
May 98 20 0.969 19 20.72 
Jun-98 30 0.969 29 20.63 
?Jul-98 33 0.969 32 20.55 
Aug-98 8 0.969 8 20.47 
2698 91 88 20.61 
Aug 98 20 0.957 19 20.47 
scp-98 32 0.957 31 20.39 
OCl-98 32 0.957 30 20.31 
Nov98 8 0.957 8 20.23 
3Q98 92 88 20.36 
NOV-98 20 0.945 19 20.23 
Dec-98 35 0.945 33 20.15 
Jan-99 27 0.945 26 20.10 
Feb-99 10 0.945 9 20.05 
4898 92 87 20.14 
Totals 365 351 
Thus, the current market value of the discounted portfolio of 
futures contracts required to replicate a fixed price swap for 
calendar 1998 is: 
Average price = ((88’~20.87)+(88’"20.61)+(88":20.36)+(87’~’20.14))/351 
i.e. Calendar 1998 weighted average price= $20.50/barrel 
10.3tpage 4 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 499/964 ---
10 Swaps 
If this price is acceptable to the producer, he would then 
instruct his broker to execute the order to sell the specified portfolio 
of contracts so as to lock in the fixed average price for the year. 
The portfolio is then unwound during 1998 by buying back an 
appropriate number of contracts every month (an average of 
slightly more than one every trading day) in order to match the 
physical sale of 1,000 b/d of WTI production on the physical market. 
This is equivalent to the floating price index in the swap contract. 
As with the swap deal, the eventual profit and loss from the 
sale and purchase of the portfolio of futures contracts is combined 
with the actual proceeds from the sale of WTI in the physical oil 
market to yield the fixed target price of $20.50 for 1998. 
Factors affecting arbitrage with futures 
There are, however, differences between the swap agreement and 
the portfolio of futures contracts which can affect the arbitrage 
relationship between the two markets. 
First, there is the question of transactions costs. A swap is a 
single transaction that covers the entire period specified in the 
agreement. Although it may be more costly to negotiate initially 
than a futures contract because the swaps market is less liquid, it is 
less costly to operate and monitor once it has been set up as there 
are no further price risks associated with executing the contract. 
The futures portfolio, however, requires repeated daily transactions 
in each of the delivery months and must be monitored constantly to 
avoid the risk of adverse price movements, especially during the 
last few days of trading for each delivery month. The weighted 
average price obtained from the market must therefore be adjusted 
to allow for transactions Costs, including brokers fees, which could 
amount to 1or 2 cents per barrel. 
Secondly, there is the question of margin calls. Futures 
contracts are marked to market on a daily basis and are subject to 
margin calls if the change in the futures price increases the 
financial exposure of the futures position. Although this is 
necessary in order to protect other htures market users against the 
risk of default, it does represent an extra cost for futures market 
users since it ties up cash that could be used for other purposes, 
which is why the number of futures contracts required to replicate 
a swap must be discounted to reflect the different payment 
schedules. These costs do not arise for a swap since these are not 
usually marked to market unless the swap provider is particularly 
worried about the financial standing of the swap purchaser. In the 
case of a portfolio of futures contracts that attempts to replicate a 
long-term swap the financial outlay associated with repeated 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.3fpage 5

--- Page 500/964 ---
-- 21.20 
Oil Trading Manual 
-
21.oo --
20.80 --
E 20.60 --
z 
*e 
20.40 20.20 
--
20.00
I t
 19.80 
Dec 97 Feb98 Apr98 Jun98 Aug98 Oct 98 Dec 98 Feb99 
Source: Nymex, lntercapital 
Figure 10.5 WTI forward curve and swaps price, 16 Oct 1997 
margin calls can be substantial -as one trading company 
discovered in late 1993. 
10.3.2 Term structure of prices 
The most important factor determining the price of a swap is the 
term structure of futures prices in the market that is being used by 
the swaps providers to hedge their exposure in the swaps market. 
The basic difference between swaps and futures is that a swap 
agreement offers a single fixed price for an entire period while the 
poistfolio of futures contracts offers a sequence of different prices for 
each delivery month. Although it is theoretically possible for all the 
futures prices to be the same, it is more likely that the futures 
prices will be on a rising (in contango) or falling (in backwardation) 
trend. The relative value of the swap agreement compared with the 
futures portfolio therefore depends on the slope of futures prices 
and whether the swap user is hedging a long or short position in 
the physical market (see Fig. 10.5). 
In the case of an oil producer, who has a long position in the 
physical market and wants to hedge his selling price, the floating 
price is likely to be above the fixed price during the early part of 
the contract period when the market is in backwardation as the 
term structure of futures prices is downward sloping. The swap 
user would therefore expect to make cash payments to the swap 
provider which he would otherwise be able to earn interest on. 
10.3tpage 6 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 501/964 ---
10 Swaps 
Swaps are therefore potentially more costly for producers when 
the market is in backwardation as they entail an initial net cash 
outflow. The reverse is true if the market is in contango, since the 
term structure of futures prices is upward sloping, and it is the 
swap provider who suffers the initial cash outflow. 
Example: The effect of term structure on swup pricing 
The arbitrage relationship between swaps and futures contracts 
also depends on the term struct.ure of prices in the futures market. 
In order to compare the market value of the portfolio of futures 
contracts with the swap market price; it is necessary to make 
allowances for the different patterns of cash flows generated by the 
two types of instrument under different market conditions: 
Net cash flow Backwardation Contango 
Producer hedge Negative Positive 
Consumer hedge Positive Negative 
In the case of the WTI producer's hedge in the example above, 
the market was in backwardation (i.e. prices for nearby delivery 
months were above prices for future delivery months) when the 
swap deal was done. As a result, the producer would expect to pay 
cash to the swap dealer during the early part of the period as the 
floating price would be higher than the fixed price -assuming the 
market remains in backwardation. This net cash outflow represents 
a cost to the producer (and a benefit to the swap dealer) from the 
swap and the interest payments on the expected payments need to 
be taken into account when pricing the swap. 
Swap Volume Average Price Expected Interest 
period traded price differential cashflow @ 5% pa 
(barrels) ($/bl) ($lbl) ($1 ($1 
1Q98 90,000 20.870 +0.370 +33,333 139 
2Q98 91,000 20.607 +0.107 +9,707 179 
3Q98 92,000 20.365 -0.135 -12,454 127 
4Q98 92,000 20.142 -0.358 -32,981 -10 
Net interest on swap payments: 435 
Annual average cost (ctshl): 0.12 
As can be seen, the net cost per barrel of interest on swap 
payments made by the producer to the swap dealer are very small 
when interest rates are low and the forward price slope is shallow. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.3fpage 7

--- Page 502/964 ---
I 
Oil Trading Manual 
However: they are important and can be significant if interest rates 
are high or the forward price slope much steeper. 
Long-term price structures 
In the case of a short-term swap, covering a period of up to a year 
ahead, the term structure can easily be observed, since most 
futures markets for oil offer a number of contracts that are traded 
at least a year ahead. In addition, contracts such as Nymex Light 
Sweet Crude (WTI) are now traded six to seven years ahead 
providing a guide to the longer-term forward price structure in the 
oil market (see Chapter 8). 
In the case of longer-term swaps which extend beyond the time 
horizon of the forward and futures markets, however, the term 
structure must be deduced (or assumed) by the swaps provider (see 
Chapter 11).One way of doing this is to create a synthetic contract 
by rolling forward a series of futures positions. In this way the cost 
of hedging depends on the cost of rolling over from one futures 
contract to the next. 
10.3.3 Basis risk 
Given that one of the primary attractions of swaps is that they can 
be tailored to meet the precise requirements of the swap user, it is 
not surprising that one of the greatest problems facing the swaps 
provider is basis risk. 
Although the term structure of the underlying futures market 
35 --Prebioiis year 
Swap differential 
30 - -Current spot differential 
25 -
98 Q2 98 03 98 Q4 99 Q1 
Source: Petroleum Argus, IPE & lntercapital 
Figure 10.6 Jet swap premium over IPE gasoil futures 
10.3tpage 8 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 503/964 ---
10 Swaps 
is important in determining the price of a swap, the real exposure 
for the swaps provider comes from the basis risk between the 
commodity specified in the swap and the futures contract that is 
being used to hedge the swap position. 
Assuming that there is a suitable reference price available for 
the grade of oil specified in the swap, there will be little or no risk 
for the swap user that the floating price will differ from the 
opportunity cost or value of the underlying physical position. 
However, from the point of view of the swaps provider the 
equivalent futures portfolio will be exposed to the risk of changes in 
the price relationship between the grade of oil specified in the 
futures contract and the grade of oil involved in the underlying 
physical position. If the risk is great, then the swap agreement will 
be worth much more to the swap user, and the swap provider will 
need to charge a larger premium to cover his exposure. 
Swap providers must therefore include a premium in the price 
of the swap that rewards them for taking the risk that the hedging 
instrument they choose is less than perfect. There is no "right" way 
of doing this since the size of the premium depends on assumptions 
about the future relationship between the price index used in the 
swap and the forward or futures contract used for hedging. In the 
early days of the swap market, swap providers relied mainly on 
past relationships as a guide, but with increasing liquidity and 
transparency the premium has come to be determined by the 
market itself (see Fig. 10.6). 
10.3.4 Credit risk 
Finally, there is the issue of credit risk. Unlike a futures contract, 
which is guaranteed by the futures exchange, a swap contract is 
not guaranteed by anybody and therefore involves a risk that the 
other party may fail to perform. Such risks may be magnified in the 
case of price swaps since the contract could cover a period of many 
years during which either party could go bankrupt. 
However, counter-party risks are quite normal in the oil 
market, which involves a wide-range of over-the-counter trading 
instruments, and there are various standard methods of dealing 
with the problem of non-performance ranging from careful 
exposure management to letters of credit (see Chapter 13). 
In addition, there are a number of specialist firms that will 
stand between two parties that do not wish to increase their mutual 
credit exposure in exchange for a fee. Nevertheless, credit risk can 
add up to 10 cents per barrel to the price difference between a 
portfolio of futures contracts and a swap agreement. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.3fpage 9

--- Page 504/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
10.3.5 Sources of price information 
Over the past ten years the price transparency of the swaps market 
has improved enormously. From being a largely private market in 
which a small number of highly tailored deals were kept secret by 
the close group of players, the swaps market has developed into a 
much more liquid and transparent market which can support 
regular price quotations for a range of standardised swap 
instruments. Although the swaps market still has a long way to go 
compared with the futures exchanges, participants accept that 
transparency is desirable if swaps are to be more widely used 
throughout the oil industry. 
But, despite the obvious improvements in price transparency, 
there are still relatively few sources of regular and reliable price 
information outside the market itself. Within the industry price 
quotations can be obtained from both market makers and specialist 
brokers, but swaps prices are not reported to the same extent as 
physical, forward and futures market prices by the major price 
reporting organisations. 
Price assessments for the more liquid swaps contracts such as 
WTI, Brent CFDs, Tapis, NW European gasoline, jet kerosine and 
high sulphur fuel oil can now be obtained from most of the major 
price reporting organisations (see Chapter 3). But a wider range of 
market quotations for swaps prices can be obtained from the 
following sources: 
Pstro leurn Argus 
Daily price assessments for Brent CFDs, paper Tapis, and a 
wide range of short-term product swap markets in NW Europe, 
the United States and Asia Pacific. Also a record of reported 
swap deals for a wide range of crude and products. 
Saladin 
Daily swaps quotations supplied by Intercapital Commodity 
Brokers Ltd together with a price history dating back to 1992. 
Coverage includes: premium unleaded gasoline barges fob 
Rotterdam, jet kerosine, diesel (EN590) and gasoil cargoes cif 
WE, LSFO cargoes fob NWE, HSFO carges cif NWE and 
baikges fob Rotterdam; kerosine, kerosine re-grade, gasoil and 
fuel oil fob Singapore, No. 6 residual fuel delivered New York 
Haibor and fob US Gulf Coast, BrentNTI differentials and the 
Brent/gasoil crack spread NWE. Also futures strips for IPE 
Brent, IPE gas oil, Nymex WTI, Nymex heating oil and Nymex 
unleaded gasoline. 
10.3/page 10 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 505/964 ---
10.4 Using swaps 
Price swaps have many potential applications in the oil market 
which helps to explain their success as a trading instrument. In the 
short term they provide an alternative to forward and futures 
contracts since they can be used to reduce or even eliminate basis 
risk. In the longer term they provide an extension to the forward 
and futures markets since they can be used to hedge prices far into 
the future beyond the time limits of existing contracts. 
In addition, it is possible to use other OTC derivatives to vary 
the level of risk protection provided by creating more elaborate 
trading instruments that mimic the behaviour of options. Such 
variations can provide users with the additional benefits of highly 
complex trading strategies within the framework of a single 
transaction. 
10.4.1 Short-term swaps 
Short-term swaps typically cover a period of up to six months ahead 
and are widely used to hedge both outright price risks for crude oil 
and refined products and to lock in refinery margins or price 
differentials between crudes or products. 
In some cases, swaps are used to fill a gap in the more limited 
range of futures contracts offered by the futures markets, and the 
level of liquidity is such that swap prices are quoted by the price 
reporting services alongside forward and futures prices. Trading 
activity in the product swaps markets is concentrated in the period 
from one to six months ahead, but deals are also regularly 
completed for periods of up to a yew ahead. Swaps are usually 
quoted on a monthly basis in the near term and on a quarterly or 
annual basis in the longer term. 
Table 10.1: Short-term swap markets 
NW Europe United States Asia Pacific 
Brent CFDs WTI strips Paper Tapis 
ErenthVTI spread Low sulphur residual Naphtha 
Brentigasoil crack High sulphur residual ?Jetkerosine 
Unleaded gasoline Jet kerosine''' Kerosine re-grade 
Naphtha Heating oil" Gasoil 
Jet kerosine Unleaded gasoline* High sulphur fuel oil 
Diesel (EN590) 
Low sulphur fuel oil 
High sulphur fuel oil US Gulf Coast 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Afpage 1

--- Page 506/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Northwest Europe 
The gasoline swaps market is based on Rotterdam fob barge 
quotations for 95 RON unleaded gasoline and deals are usually 
done in 5:OOO tonne lots. The naphtha and jet kerosine swaps 
market are based on NW Europe cif cargo quotations. The EN590 
diesel swaps market is based on NW Europe cif cargo quotations. 
The low sulphur fuel oil swaps market is based on NW Europe fob 
cargo quotations and deals are usually done in lots of 5,000 or 
10,000 tonnes. And the high sulphur fuel oil swaps market is based 
on Rotterdam fob barge quotations and deals are usually done in 
lots of 5,000 or 10,000 tonnes (see Fig. 10.7). 
United States 
In the United States, short-term price "strips" for WTI and other 
pipeline crudes are actively traded. Strips (or mini-term deals) are 
based either on the Nymex light sweet crude contract or on posted 
prices and allow companies to lock in a fixed price over a period of 
three to six months. 
Refined product price swaps are traded for all main products at 
all major locations, but low sulphur residual and high sulphur 
residual swaps based on Platt’s quotations are the most widely 
quoted and fill an important gap in the range of contracts offered by 
the US futures markets. The low sulphur (1 per cent) residual 
swaps market is based on New York Harbor price quotations, while 
240 
Spot barges, fob Rotterdam 
220 Swaps, 3 months ahead 
200 
160 
140 
Source: Petroleum Argus, Intercapital 
Figure 10.7 NW Europe unleaded gasoline barge swaps prices 
10.4tpage 2 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 507/964 ---
10 Swaps 
the high sulphur (3 per cent) residual swaps market is based on US 
Gulf Coast price quotations. The Gulf Coast market also trades 
unleaded gasoline, jet kerosine and heating oil swaps. 
Asia Pacific 
In Asia, light sweet crudes can be hedged using the so-called 
"paper" Tapis market. Despite its name, paper Tapis is actually a 
swaps market and not a forward paper contract. The market is not 
based on standardised quantities like most other short-term swap 
markets, but a typical paper Tapis deal would be for 100,000 
barrels. 
The paper Tapis market is based on the average of Tapis APPI 
(Asian Petroleum Price Index) price quotations for a given month 
and enables companies to fix the price of cargoes of physical Tapis 
and other similar regional crudes which are usually sold using a 
formula price which also includes the Tapis APPI price quotation 
(see Chapter 4). Since APPI price assessments roll-over in the 
middle of the month, the paper Tapis market for any given calendar 
month is always slightly out of line with the underlying physical 
market for physical Tapis delivered in the same month. In a 
backwardated market, the paper Tapis price for August will be 
lower than the spot price for August Tapis because the average of 
the published APPI price quotations for August will be based on a 
combination of August and September spot Tapis prices (see 
Chapter 18). 
As far as refined products are concerned, price swaps are now 
the most popular method of hedging short-term price risks in the 
Asia Pacific market. Naphtha swaps based on fob Singapore cargoes 
are traded alongside the revived open-spec naphtha forward paper 
market for delivery c+f Japan (see Chapter 7).And price swaps for 
jet kerosine, gasoil and high sulphur fuel oil are also actively traded 
based on Platt’s fob Singapore price quotations. The gasoline swaps 
market is no longer active as the region currently lacks a clear 
gasoline price marker (see Chapter 5). 
10.4.2 Long-term swaps 
Long-term swaps have no theoretical limit to their time-horizon but 
typically cover periods from six months to ten years ahead. At the 
nearer end of the market they are used to support supply decisions, 
but further out they are used to support investment decisions, such 
as developing a new oil field. Unlike shorter-term swaps, which are 
priced in relation to the futures markets, long-term swaps do not 
always have a clear pricing basis. Prices can therefore be more 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Afpage 3

--- Page 508/964 ---
1 
Oil Trading Manual 
. . . . . . .Nearby futures 
~ 12 months ahead futures 
A 5yearswap 
10 -I 
Jan97 Apr97 Jul97 Oct 97 Jan98 Apr98 Jul98 Oct 98 
Source: Nymex, Intercapital 
Figure 10.8 Long-term WTI swaps prices 
subjective since they may require swap providers to take a very 
long term view of oil price prospects and to extrapolate the forward 
price structure beyond the time horizons of the existing forward 
and futures markets (see Chapter 11). 
The most active long-term swaps market is for WTI and the 
market is now sufficiently liquid to provide regular bidask 
quotations at least five years ahead (see Fig. 10.8). Since the 
market is based on the Nymex light sweet crude contract, which 
now trades up to seven years ahead, the slope of the long-term WTI 
swaps price profile is determined by arbitrage with the futures 
market. Rut further out, one of the factors determining the forward 
curve is the long-term interest rate curve. Other long-term swaps 
markets such as Brent typically trade at a differential to the WTI 
swaps price. 
10.4.3 Over-the-counter (OTC) options 
OTC derivatives can also be structured to provide various degrees 
of price protection. Swaps are the simplest type of OTC derivative -sometimes described as "plain vanilla" -since they are designed 
to transfer all the price risk from the swap user to the swap 
provider. But it is also possible to create many different "flavours" 
of OTC derivatives that provide, for example, an upper (cap) or 
lower (floor) limit to prices, or allow the user to confine the price 
exposure to a specified range (collar), and even "participate" in the 
profits if prices move outside a specified range. 
10.4lpage 4 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 509/964 ---
10 Swaps 
These more elaborate derivatives include OTC options which 
can also be tailored to suit the user in exactly the same way as a 
simple price swap (see Chapter 9). Although similar hedging 
strategies can be devised using exchange-traded options, the user 
faces the same problems of basis risk that affect the hedging 
efficiency of futures contracts. As a result, price caps, floors and 
collars are now widely used by companies seeking effective and 
accurate control of their price exposure. 
What is an OTC option? 
There is no standard form of OTC option since the parties involved 
can choose from a variety of option types to structure their 
agreement. However, the most common form of OTC option used in 
the energy market is an average price option (APO), sometimes 
known as an Asian. option to distinguish it from American and 
European options, which works in much the same may as a price 
swap. 
Like an exchange-traded option, an OTC option confers on the 
buyer the right, but not the obligation, to buy (or sell) the 
underlying commodity at an agreed fixed price in exchange for an 
"insurance" premium that is paid up-front. But, instead of being 
converted into a futures contract if it is exercised by the buyer, an 
OTC option can either be converted into a cash payment from the 
option writer to the option buyer or into a swap (swaption). OTC 
options therefore remain purely financial transactions and, like 
price swaps, cannot be used to make or take physical delivery of the 
underlying commodity. Like price swaps, OTC options can also be 
applied to any asset for which a mutually acceptable pricing 
mechanism can be established. 
Although the general principles for using OTC average price 
options are the same as for exchange-traded options, there are a 
number of important differences. First, the terminology is not quite 
the same. An OTC call option is generally known as a "price cap", 
while an OTC put option is known as a "price floor". Secondly, OTC 
average price or Asian options can only be exercised at their expiry 
date and are only exercised if the period average price is above (or 
below) the agreed cap or floor price. This distinguishes them from 
European options, which can only be exercised if the market price 
is above the strike price on the expiry date, and American options, 
which can be exercised if the market price goes above the strike 
price at any point up to and including the expiry date. Thirdly, 
OTC average price options are automatically exercised on expiry if 
they are in the money. This is not the case for exchange-traded 
options since there are sometimes tax advantages to be gained from 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Afpage 5

--- Page 510/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
not exercising in-the-money options or exercising out-of-the-money 
options. And finally, like a price swap, OTC average price options 
usually cover a longer period than a futures contract, for example, 
a quarter or a year. 
Apart from these practical differences, however, the risk and 
reward profile of an OTC option is the same as for an exchange-
traded option. An option buyer's exposure is limited to the premium 
that is paid to the option writer, while the option writer's exposure 
is unlimited. 
Hour does a price cap work? 
A company, such as an airline, that wants to set an upper limit to 
the price of its jet fuel requirements over the next quarter could 
purchase a price cap for the next three months from an OTC 
options market maker instead of using the futures market to hedge 
its jet fuel costs with exchange-traded options. 
The OTC price cap agreement specifies that the market maker 
will pay the airline the difference between the price cap and the 
monthly average jet fuel price for an agreed quantity of jet fuel in 
any of the next three months in which the average monthly market 
price of jet fuel exceeds the level agreed for the price cap. In 
exchange the airline agrees to pay the market maker in advance a 
fixed and non-refundable premium for the same quantity of jet fuel 
over the entire period. 
The market price of jet fuel is determined by the monthly 
average of the daily price assessment published by a mutually 
acceptable and reputable price reporting service. The option is 
automatically exercised by the market maker if the monthly 
average market price of jet fuel exceeds the level agreed for the 
price cap. The contract is settled, like a price swap, usually at the 
end of each month, by paying the difference between the fixed price 
and the period average floating price to the airline if the option is 
deemed to have been exercised. If the monthly average remains 
below the level agreed for the price cap, the market maker is not 
required to make any payments. 
Since the contract does not involve physical delivery, the 
airline needs to make separate arrangements to purchase the jet 
fuel. If the monthly average market price remains below the level 
agreed for the price cap, the effective price paid by the airline will 
be the market price plus the premium paid to the market maker for 
the OTC option. If the monthly average market price goes above 
the level agreed for the price cap, the net payments from the 
market maker minus the premium paid can be used to offset the 
higher market price for jet fuel. In this way the maximum price 
10.4tpage 6 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 511/964 ---
10 Swaps 
paid by the airline is limited to the level agreed for the price cap 
plus the premium paid to the market. maker for the option. 
How are OTC options priced? 
Like swaps, arbitrage between the OTC options market and the 
exchange-traded market ensures that average price options are 
priced in line with exchange-traded options contracts. However, 
since options are "non-linear" trading instruments it is not possible 
to replicate exactly the payoff from an OTC average price option 
with a portfolio of exchange-traded options -as it was in the case 
of a price swap (see Chapter 9). 
Like exchange-traded options, the price of an OTC option will 
depend partly on the market's view- of the expected price volatility 
for the commodity, partly on the current price level of the 
underlying strip of swaps prices, partly on the duration of the 
option, and partly on the strike price agreed for the price cap or 
floor (see Chapter 9). Market makers in the OTC options markets 
use a variety of pricing models, including modifications of the Black 
and Scholes options pricing model -originally developed for 
European options -to evaluate the premium they require to sell a 
price cap or floor. But everyone likes to use their own variations to 
fine-tune pricing models according to their views of how the market 
works. 
In the short term the OTC options market tends to track the 
level of price volatility implied by the exchange-traded options 
market, but in the longer term the market forms its own view of the 
expected level of price volatility as there are no exchange-traded 
options available that far out to provide a guide (see Chapter 18). 
Example: Hedging jet fuel with swaps and OTC options 
A European airline specialising in holiday charter flights is 
considering using price swaps or OTC options to limit its exposure 
to fluctuations in the price of jet fuel during the winter ski-season. 
In order to fix prices in June 1998 for a new holiday brochure being 
prepared by a major travel company the airline obtains quotes for 
three types of swap deal that might be appropriate. 
Simple (plain. uanilla) swap 
The simplest arrangement would be a stt-aight-forward "fixed for 
floating" price swap for the period October to March based on 
Platt’s quotations for jet fuel cargoes cif NW Europe. This could be 
done at $140/tonne in June 1998 and would guarantee the airline a 
fixed price for its jet fuel over the entire winter period. As long as 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Afpage 7

--- Page 512/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
160 155 150 
c 
@ 145 9-2 140 c 
2L 
135 m s 130 125 120 
120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 
Market price ($/tonne) 
Figure 10.9 Result of hedging using a simple swap 
the airline can buy physical jet fuel at prices equivalent to Platt’s 
jet kerosine price quotations, the "plain vanilla" price swap will 
provide a perfect hedge whatever happens to jet prices over the six 
month period (see Fig. 10.9). 
If the average monthly spot jet fuel price is higher than 
$140/tonne, the airline will receive a cash payment from the swaps 
provider equal to the difference between $140/tonne and the 
monthly average of Platt’s jet cargoes cif NWE that can be used to 
offset its higher purchase costs on the physical market. And if the 
average monthly spot jet fuel price is lower than $140/tonne, the 
airline will have to make a payment to the swaps provider that will 
offset its lower purchase price on the physical market. 
Price cap (ceiling swap) 
An alternative, but rather costly, arrangement would be to 
purchase a price cap (or ceiling swap) for the same time period. 
This would allow the airline to set a maximum price for its jet fuel 
over the winter, while allowing it to benefit from lower fuel costs if 
the opportunity arises. Since it is an option, the cost of a price cap 
depends on how far "out of the money" the ceiling price is set (see 
Chapter 9). In June 1998, an at the rnoney cap of $140/tonne would 
have cost $10/tonne, while an out of the money cap at $150/tonne 
would have cost $7/tonne. This premium, like any option premium 
is non-returnable as it is effectively an insurance premium against 
a price rise. 
10.4/page 8 Supplement 6 Oct 1998

--- Page 513/964 ---
10 Swaps 
160 155 150 
S 
145 
?2-2 140 c 2 135 
6 130 v) 
125 120 
120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 
Market price ($:Tonne) 
Figure 10.10 Result of hedging using a price cap 
If the average monthly spot jet fuel price is lower than the 
price ceiling specified in the price cap agreement, the airline does 
not have to pay any more to the swap provider and simply buys its 
.jet fuel on the spot market at the lower market price (see Fig. 
10.10). But if the average monthly spot jet fuel price is higher than 
the agreed price ceiling, the airline will receive a monthly cash 
payment from the swaps provider equal to the difference between 
the ceiling and the monthly average of Platt’s jet cargoes cif NWE 
that can be used to offset its higher purchase costs on the physical 
market. 
Price collar (price range swap) 
A cheaper alternative would be to purchase a price collar (or price 
range swap) which sets both a floor and a ceiling price. This would 
expose the airline to a specified (narrow) range of price fluctuations 
in the price of jet fuel, while providing insurance against very large 
price movements. It is cheaper than a price cap because the airline 
forgoes some of the downside benefits of lower oil prices in 
exchange for fixing a maximum price for its jet fuel over the winter. 
Like a cap, the price of a collar depends on how far "out of the 
money" the ceiling and floor prices are set, but the net cost of the 
two combined options is much lower because the swap provider's 
risk is limited on both the upside and downside (see Chapter 9). 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10Afpage 9

--- Page 514/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
I6O160 T /
155 155 
g 150g 150 
c
c 
@ 145@ 145 9
9- -2 1402 140 c
c L L2 1352 135 m
m s 130s 130 125
125 
120 120 i I// 
120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 160 
Market price ($/tonne) Market price ($/tonne) 
Figure 10.11 Result of hedging using aprice collar 
In June 1998, a price collar with a ceiling price of $145/tonne 
and a floor price of $135/tonne would have cost only $l/tonne. As 
before, the premium must be paid up-front and is non-returnable. 
With this type of price collar, the airline is only exposed to 
movements in the average monthly spot jet fuel price over a range 
of $10/tonne (see Fig. 10.11). If the average monthly spot jet fuel 
price rises above $145/tonne, the airline receives a monthly cash 
payment from the swaps provider equal to the difference between 
the ceiling and the monthly average of Platt’s jet cargoes cif NWE 
that can be used to offset its higher purchase costs on the physical 
market. But if the average monthly spot jet fuel price is lower than 
$135, the airline will have to make a payment to the swaps provider 
that will offset its lower purchase price on the physical market. 
10.4/page 10 Supplement 6 Oct 1998 I

--- Page 515/964 ---
10.5 Future developments 
Swaps and other OTC derivative instruments remain the fastest 
growing sector of the oil market. The ease with which they can be 
tailored to match the individual price exposure of each participant 
continues to ensure their popularity. And the increased flexibility 
associated with a purely financial instrument has enabled them to 
capture most of the liquidity previously attracted to a wide range of 
informal forward paper contracts. In addition, the use of long-term 
swap contracts to reduce the risks of investing in major capital 
projects such as an oil field or a refinery has sustained the 
development of this important market for oil. 
But the future expansion of the OTC market could be affected 
by uncertainty over the possible regulation of financial derivatives 
in the US. The rapid growth of derivatives trading throughout the 
financial sector has led to concerns about the scale of risk being 
assumed by the derivatives traders and there is growing pressure 
for more regulation and control of these markets. Although such 
moves are being strongly resisted by the financial services industry -and currently enjoy only limited support among the various 
regulatory authorities -the very large losses incurred by a small 
number of derivatives providers could force changes in the law, 
both in the US and elsewhere. 
Supplement 6 Oct 1998 10.5fpage 1

--- Page 516/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 517/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
Frederic Barnaud & Philippe Lautard 
11.1 Introduction 
11.2 Market participants 
11.2.1 Companies and countries exposed to oil prices 
11.2.2 Banks and investment houses 
11.2.3 Oil traders and Wall Street 
11.2.4 Unexposed companies, funds and speculators 
11.2.5 Arguments for investing in oil 
11.3 Market liquidity 
11.3.1 Visibility 
11.3.2 Liquidity 
11.4 Trading instruments 
11.4.1 Long term trading instruments 
11.4.2 Oil warrants 
11.4.3 Royalty trusts 
11.4.4 Synthetic oil fields 
11.5 Pricing models 
11.5.1 Log normality of outright prices 
11.5.2 Normality of price spreads 
11.5.3 ARCH volatility 
11.5.4 Market constraints 
11.5.5 Prices, term structure and risks 
11.6 Contractual issues 
11.6.1 Need for a master agreement 
11.6.2 Evaluation of credit risk 
11.6.3 Implications for administrative procedures

--- Page 518/964 ---
11.7 Using long dated derivatives 
11.7.1 An oil producer's price exposure 
11.7.2 Using oil derivatives 
11.7.3 Hedging strategies 
11.7.4 Tax issues 
11.7.5 Basis risk 
11.8 Conclusions 
Appendix 
11.1 Sale of a swap 
11.2 Sale of a min-max swap 
11.3 Purchase of a floor swap 
11.4 Sale of a ceiling swap 
11.5 Collar 
11.6 Producer participation

--- Page 519/964 ---
11.1 Introduction 
The oil industry has always needed to take a long term view of 
investment. Geological risks, which characterised the risk and 
reward structure of the pioneering epoch in the second half of the 
nineteenth century, can be greatly reduced by the use of better 
techniques and technology, and -ultimately -by luck, but they 
cannot be managed. The management of risk in the oil industry 
depends on both time and prices: producing oil from a new oil field 
typically requires several years and a huge investment; while 
moving the oil from the well-head to the consumer requires several 
weeks and the use of many financially illiquid assets such as 
pipelines, ships, tankage, and refineries. 
To ensure their success -or simply their survival -in such a 
difficult business environment, oil companies and producing and 
consuming countries have put into practice a wide variety of 
economic theories and have also tried some exotic solutions. These 
include vertical, horizontal 01-global integration, nationalisation of 
producing assets, national price control, swinging or controlling 
production, oligopolistic agreements, long term contracts, and 
netback pricing. And, since the early 1980s, the combination of 
events and people have triggered the emergence of spot and futures 
markets in oil. Modern financial techniques have turned the wet 
barrels of oil first into paper barrels and then into video barrels. 
Methods of managing risk, especially in the context of highly 
erratic prices, have increased tenfold as a result of the new 
markets, which provide a focus for the expectations not only of the 
oil industry, but also of the other main economic agents. The 
standardised markets -futures markets such as the Nymex, the 
IPE and the Simex, or forward markets, such as dated Brent, 
Littlebrook Lottery or Russian Roulette -have now become a 
major factor in the pricing mechanism for short-to-medium term 
crude oil and refined products. This role was dramatically revealed 
to the world and then enhanced b.y the first "oil war" in the period 
August 1990 to March 1991. 
Recently, a market for long-term oil has been jointly developed 
to meet specific requirements in the industry, to sti'ucture oil- 
linked transactions and to create new opportunities for speculators. 
This new over-the-counter market has brought together heavy 
weighted and highly ranked oil companies, banks and traders. 
Their external counterparts include oil producers and importers 
(countries as well as companies), end-users, financing institutions, 
large funds and small speculators. A typical long-term transaction 
ll.l/page 1

--- Page 520/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
ranges from 5,000 b/d to 50,000 b/d with a time horizon of three, 
five: seven or even ten years. In other words, the volume of oil 
involved is sizeable when compared to: 
0 the Nymex WTI Light Sweet Crude futures trading volume: 
106 million b/d, 
0 world energy demand: 65 million b/d, with a forecast annual 
growth rate of more than 1million b/d, 
0 Opec's current production quota of 25 million b/d. 
This chapter gives a general overview of the long-term oil 
market. It portrays, first, the different actors in the market, and 
the way liquidity is generated and evaluated. Secondly, it presents 
the whole range of hedging and speculative instruments available 
to traders, producers and end-users. Thirdly, the main risks 
embodied in pricing and hedging long-term oil contracts and the 
ways they are modelled by market theoreticians are explained. 
Fourthly, the contractual environment, with legal, credit-risk 
evaluation and administrative aspects are reviewed briefly. And 
last, but not least, a broad analysis of long-term oil trading for 
producers is presented and illustrated by concrete hedging 
strategies and practical advice. 
ll.l/page 2

--- Page 521/964 ---
0 
11.2 Market participants 
11.2.1 Companies and countries exposed to oil prices 
Large integrated oil companies have been involved in oil trading 
activities ever since the emergence of markets and they have set up 
trading subsidiaries to develop an expertise in modern oil risk 
management. These were first created for internal purposes, to 
manage, in a global way, the transfer of risk between affiliates. 
However, some of them have also developed an external 
independent clientele for diversifying theti- portfolio. Their presence 
in the long-dated oil market is characterised by: 
precise and global access to information, which is the nerve 
centre of any market, 
an opportunity to associate strategic group decisions with 
some transactions, with all the involvement in terms of 
pricing or hedging, 
an ability to work on long-term contracts with specific 
physical delivery clauses, or ArguslPlatt�s related terms, 
a good and high-level covering of their traditional 
counterparts, oil-exposed countries as well as oil companies. 
Similarly, medium-size oil companies, for instance independent 
oil producers and refiners have been directly involved in physical 
oil trading as most of their incomes and some of their costs are 
linked to spot prices in the market. They have therefore followed -
or’ even anticipated -the trend towards improved risk 
management and are increasingly willing to work on long-term 
transactions. 
Within the large world of oil-price-exposed entities, oil 
importing and exporting national companies and countries only 
play a marginal role. Their vision of risk management often relies 
on global economic solutions rather than direct oil price hedging 
policies. This is especial1.y true of the oil producing countries, which 
(reportedly) consider. oil markets as a vehicle for speculation and an 
amplifier. of price fluctuations. However, some oil exporting 
countries are said to have concluded long-term transactions at the 
end of 1990, taking advantage of high prices during the Gulf crisis. 
The oil importing countries, on the other hand, have traditionally 
sought solutions that are complementary to their economic 
situation. Their exposure cannot be controlled and there have been 
at least five oil crises with major price increases for one price fall. 
ll.2tpage 1

--- Page 522/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
But it can be managed. Their requirements obviously differ 
according to the structure of the oil industry in the oil consuming 
country. Depending on their refining capacity, they may be either a 
net importer of refined products, or a net importer of both crude oil 
and refined products, or a net importer of crude oil only, or even a 
net importer of crude oil and a net exporter of refined products. 
Prices may be locked into a national price control framework, or be 
related to world oil market prices. 
These elements must be analysed and taken into account in 
order to define an appropriate long-term hedging strategy. Given 
the large volumes generally involved, it is often optimal to set up 
the hedging scheme regularly over a certain period of time and to 
monitor and manage the strategy continuously. 
11.2.2 Banks and investment houses 
The involvement of banks and financial investment houses in the 
market for long-dated oil has been an important factor in its 
development and liquidity. They have transferred financial 
techniques from interest rates and foreign exchange derivative 
markets to the oil market. This has been guided by their clients' 
need for global structured transactions, and also contributes to a 
strategy of risk diversification away from their traditional 
businesses. Their presence in the long-dated oil market is 
characterised by: 
0 extensive experience of financial derivative markets and 
admini strntion, 
0 an opportunity to work on structured deals with complex 
payoffs, to propose global financing and combined risk 
management solutions, 
0 the existence of a highly captive clientele, with whom they 
generally have a long-term and stable relationship. 
According to their portfolio structure, banks and investment 
houses may be divided into two main groups: 
0 some do not take on the specific oil price risk but separate it 
out from the main deal in order to swap it with other oil 
trading counterparts. As they are only present from time to 
time, they cannot be considered as true counterparts, but 
they bring a considerable amount of liquidity to the market. 
0 other banks and investment houses have chosen to manage 
the oil price risk and have created a sophisticated trading 
11.2lpage 2

--- Page 523/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
portfolio. But, possibly because of the difficulties facing a 
bank as an actor in the physical oil market, their core 
activity is mainly based on futures-linked deals, WTI and 
other Nymex or IPE references; and on medium and long 
term transactions. 
11.2.3 Oil traders and Wall Street 
The presence of traditional oil trading houses is not as important in 
the long-term oil market as it is for physical and medium-term 
markets. Some companies, however, have acquired diversified 
interests as a result of their structure: halfway between a trader 
and an oil company owning refineries or other assets or 
(sometimes) a share holding relationship with a bank. The 
involvement of traders in the long-dated oil market is characterised 
by: 
0 a traditional aggressiveness, due to their excellent 
knowledge of physical markets, access to information and 
their quick reactions, 
0 the ability to work on instruments combined with physical 
delivery or ArgudPlatt’s risks. 
11.2.4 Unexposed companies, funds and speculators 
The development of the long-dated oil market satisfies the needs of 
many different actors for alternative risk management 
instruments. The interest of other types of companies -many of 
which are not directly exposed to oil price risks -such as large 
investment funds and large and small speculators, has been 
triggered by the fact that oil is a commodity that is strongly 
influenced by political and economic factors. Thus large funds may 
seek a long-term investment related to oil finance as a partial 
hedge to their interest rates and inflation risks, or as a portfolio 
diversification. 
These other types of participant have played an important role 
in the market for long-term oil not only during the extreme price 
movements of the Gulf crisis, but also in response to the general 
uncertainty over oil prices, appearing either in a direct relationship 
with oil traders, or through their interest in instruments such as 
warrants or synthetic oil fields, which are quoted on secondary 
financial markets. Elf Trading's published work1 shows that 
With the collaboration of the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies 
ll.2tpage 3

--- Page 524/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Vbbl 
7-
-1st Nby WTI Price 
6-
Kbbl/day 
1iMari94 1OlMari94 21iMari94 30iMari94 08iApri94 19iApri94 
iource. Elf Trading 
Figure 11.1 Influence of funds on nearby WTI futures prices 
speculators also respond to price volatility but, to a large extent, 
this response is in the nature of arbitrage with liquidity. This 
explains the large shifts of speculative interest from one market to 
another. As a result, the market for long-term oil appears more and 
more to be naturally integrated into the global framework of 
financial markets, equities, interest rates or foreign exchange. 
An example of how fund activity can influence the level of oil 
prices in the short run is given by looking at the WTI price around 
March and April in 1994 (see Fig. 11.1). A first surge in activity, 
shortly after an OPEC production quota meeting, resulted in a 
sharp downward market gap. Subsequently, funds decided that the 
market was oversold and came into the market, boosted volumes 
and caused an upward market price spike. 
(OIES) and its Director Robert Mabro, some Elf Trading research 
assistants havc publishcd work on cncrgy markcts: 
Barnaud, F., 1990, In Search of Liquidity: Hedging and Speculation. 
in. Oil Futures Mdzets, OIES WPM 13, 
Chassard, C. & Halliwell, M., 1986, The Nymex Crude Oil Futures 
Market: an Annl.ysi.7 of its Performmnm?, OIES WPM 9, 
Chassard, C., 198'7, Option, Trading ad Oil Futures Markets, OIES 
WPM 11, 
Gabillon J., 1991, The Term Structure of Oil Futures Prices, OIES 
WPM 17, 
Trahia X., 1992, Financkd Oil Deriualiues: from Oplions lo Oil 
Warrants and Synthetic Oilfields, OIES SP3. 
11.2lpage 4

--- Page 525/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
11.2.5 Arguments for investing in oil 
Lately, commodities have attracted increased interest as an 
investment instrument. The poor performance of traditional equity 
and fixed income investments, a positive fundamental outlook on 
commodities and portfolio diversification arguments have drawn 
institutional investors into the market. 
Oil, being the pre-eminent industrial commodity, has the 
diversification and exposure benefits of more broadly based 
commodity indices: and offers the superior liquidity and 
transparency of its underlying futures market. Focusing on one 
strategic commodity also facilitates the investment decision process 
and allows a better economic fundamental understanding. 
Modern portfolio theory (MPT) as prescribed by Markowitz, 
dictates that investors should allocate their assets across as wide a 
range of investments as possible (i.e. the market portfolio) in order 
to obtain an optimal risk-reward combination. The main benefit of 
investing in oil-linked instruments is thus to diversify traditional 
stock and bond portfolios and protect them from inflation. 
Table 11.1 shows the degree of correlation between crude oil 
prices and a number of other major economic indices. The results 
were calculated using monthly data from January 1985 to January 
1995 and the analysis was performed using rates of change. 
Table 11.1 Correlations with Nyrnex nearby WTI futures 
S&P 500 Stock Index 
Salomon Brolhers Treasury Bond Index 
US Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
US Producw Price! Indcx (PPI) 
Hedge ag,ainst inflation 
Worries about an overheating US economy and a subsequent rise in 
inflation were the underlying causes of depressed financial markets 
in 1994. The positive correlation recorded between oil and the 
consumer price index (CPI) and producer price index (PPI) means 
that adding an oil component to a portfolio can increase returns as 
inflation rises. 
Portfolio diversification 
Negative correlation recorded between oil and the Standard & 
Poor's (S&P) 500 index and the Salomon Brothers Bond Index 
ll.2ipage 5

--- Page 526/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
30 
28 
26 
h 
24 
2 22 In 
% 20 7 
$ 18 
2 16 w3 
14 12 
10 -I 
Jan-85 Jan86 Jan-87 Jan88 Jan-89 Jan-90 Jan-91 Jan-92 Jan-93 Jan-94 
3urce: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.2 WTI price adjusted for inflation, I985 dollars 
means that adding an oil component will reduce the volatility of a 
portfolio and thus enhance its risk and reward characteristics. 
Under performing asset class 
Little evidence exists to support the argument that crude oil will 
continuously outperform traditional equity or fixed income 
instruments on a long-term basis. The fact, however, remains that 
inflation-adjusted crude oil prices currently stand at historically 
low levels (see Fig. 11.2). Continuously increasing world energy 
consumption combined with a tight Opec production ceiling remain 
as medium-term bullish factors and Middle Eastern political 
uncertainty offers the potential for price surges. 
1l.Z/p age 6

--- Page 527/964 ---
11.3 Market liquidity 
11.3.1 Visibility 
The long-dated oil market, being a typical over-the-counter market, 
where transactions may be negotiated at state level over a few 
months, often lacks visibility. With not much standardisation of 
terms, a global "private and confidential" basis and no reporting 
agency, there is no reliable way of measuring the long-term 
activity. For instance, nothing is known about deals made between 
the banks and their captive clientele, which leads to an 
underestimation of the market's size. Another example is the 
limited role of brokers: many long-term deals are conducted directly 
between counterparts, since they need time to structure most of the 
transactions, a precise credit-default risk evaluation and legal 
negotiations around a master agreement. 
Both buyers and sellers must also be blamed for this opacity 
since every trader tries to keep deals as private and confidential as 
possible. 
11.3.2 Liquidity 
Although lack of visibility may be the essence of the long-term oil 
market, this does not prevent us from evaluating the liquidity of 
the market. If visibility is concerned with the activity of the market -the number of deals, a17ernge volume and maturity involved -
the notion of liquidity is concerned with the opportunities for 
participants to turn over their portfolio quickly at low cost. 
The liquidity of a derivative trading instrument can be 
indirectly evaluated by the 1iquidit.y of its ultimate hedging market, 
for example Nymex WTI futures for. long-term crude oil swaps.a 
The Nymex provides market participants with many statistics: 
trading volume and open interest, information on futures contracts, 
and reports of large hedging and speculative interests. Figure 11.3 
illustrates how this information can be synthesised to assess the 
growing size of the long-term oil markets. It shows the percentage 
of the Nymex WTI open interest for. contracts with a maturity over 
For swap writers, it is important to note that the Nymex actually 
limits the open interest on the first maturity to any trading company and 
refuses a limit exemption on this first maturity for the purpose of swap 
hedging. Hedging computations have to take this into account and therefore 
use other maturities for covering large volumes. 
ll.3tpage 1

--- Page 528/964 ---
-- -- 
-- 
Oil Trading Manual 
-14% 
12% c 
01a, 
z 10%c 
c 
-m 5 6%c 
0% -
Dec 90 Dec 91 Dec 92 Dec 93 Dec 94 
I 
Source: Elf Trading, Nyrnex 
Figure 11.3 Share of WTI open interest 19 to 36 months ahead 
eighteen months (back months). Hedging long-term transactions 
with futures contracts will usually increase activity in the back 
months in order to limit the risks of the maturity factor and the 
term structure of prices. The back months started trading in 
December 1990 during the Gulf crisis. Their success has been very 
impressive as, only a year later, they accounted for around ten per 
cent of the WTI futures total open interest, which represents a 
position of 40 million barrels. 
However, to be fully relevant when analysed in terms of 
market liquidity, the figures provided by the Nymex and other 
exchanges have to be further processed. For example, it is 
important to understand the behaviour of market participants, 
mainly hedgers, speculators, locals, market makers, and their 
respective impact on volume and open interest. The evolution, 
either structural, seasonal or opportunist, of their requirements 
would change the pattern of liquidity in futures and derivative 
markets. 
Understanding liquidity of the underlying hedging market can 
give a clue to the liquidity of a derivative market. Monitoring the 
bidoffer spreads of such instruments gives additional information 
and complements the analysis. The larger the bidoffer spread, the 
worse is the liquidity of the market, for it represents the 
instantaneous cost of reversing or closing out a position. For 
example, the spread for the first three traded maturities is only a 
few cents. But this increases to twenty cents for the Nymex back 
11.3tpage 2

--- Page 529/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
months, leading to a fifty cent bidoffer range for a classical five- 
year-maturity swap. Such a biaoffer spread is not constant over 
time nor across maturities. It would aggregate different 
components and have complementary characteristics. 
Market participants' trading decisions are the first element 
that determines the size of the swap spread. They take into 
consideration how the swap would fit into their existing positions 
and directional views, how it would suit their long-term strategic 
decision process and whether they would like to make a tight 
market quote versus their competit.ors. 
Other elements that could influence the spread are liquidity 
considerations, ongoing hedging or position rolling transactions, 
option-related trading activity, mathematical and modelling factors, 
and legal matters. 
11.3ipage 3

--- Page 530/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 531/964 ---
11.4 Trading instruments 
11.4.1 Long term trading instruments 
The long-term oil derivative market is a modern market which 
provides trading participants with many diversified instruments. 
These may be based on straightforward swaps, include optional and 
synthetic payoffs, have physical delivery characteristics or be 
settled on any relevant ArguslPlatt’s index. Table 11.2 gives a 
general overview of the most frequently traded derivatives, and 
additional information is provided in Section 11.7 on using long- 
dated derivatives and the related Appendices. Built on these 
instruments, further sophisticated hedging strategies can be 
precisely tailored to the client's needs. 
11.4.2 Oil warrants 
Oil warrants are investment instruments offered to the public and 
can be used to speculate on different oil price and volatility 
scenarios. Even if both the issue and the secondary market's 
activity are difficult to monitor, it appenrs that this class of 
instruments is likely to flourish and enjoy considerable success 
during major oil price turmoil periods, like the Gulf crisis and war 
in 1990/91. 
The structure of payoffs often includes some exotic components 
like American options on futures or nearby maturities, compound 
options on Asian options or look back options (see Chapter 9). But, 
apart from the theoretical difficulties and management decisions 
embedded in the initial pricing and hedging, the most important 
factor of a successful launch appears to be the timing and the 
marketing of the warrant. This is the major reason why such 
instruments have been main1.y written by banks and financial 
institutions. 
Deeper analysis has often shown that these so-called oil 
warrants are relative1,y expensive for oil traders, but are more 
suitable for the public to whom the oil market is not easily 
accessible. 
11.4.3 Royalty trusts 
Royalty trusts, like the Prudhoe Bay Royalty Trust issued by 
British Petroleum and Standard Oil, may be summarised as bonds 
whose yield is effectively based on the production and price of 
ll.4tpage 1

--- Page 532/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Table 11.2 Main long term oil trading instruments 
Type 
Swaps 
Asian options 
American 
options 
Corn binations 
of swaps and 
options Swaptions 
Exotic payofj 
Physical 
delivery 
Slruclured 
transactions 
Wall; Street 
financial oil 
instruments Characteristics Objectives 
Periodical financial settlement The simple direct hedge, 
against the average of futures, tailored to minimise the 
a nearby or an ArguslPlatt’s client's basis risk. 
index. 
Periodical financial settlement Being hedged on the risk 
against an average, over or 
under an agreed strike price. 
The buyer must pay an initial 
premium directly linked to 
price volatility and time 
maturity . side with the open 
opportunity to take 
advantage of favourable 
price moves. Buying an 
option is like buying an 
insurance policy. 
Opportunity to lock in hedging Added flexibility at a cost. 
profits, if any, at any time 
during the life period of the 
option. Min-max swaps, collars, 
participation swaps. 
Opportunity, for 
a certain 
time, to enter a swap at an 
agreed price. Initial premium 
paid by buyer. 
Options on spread values, e.g. 
WTI-Brent or time spread. 
Option on options, on min or 
max value. 
Financial hedging corrhined 
with the delivery, optional or 
nol, of physical crude oil. 
Global transactions, e.g. 
energy swaps and options 
written in any European 
currency. Loans and finance 
indexed on oil prices. 
Financial instruments which 
replicate the payoffs ofan oil 
field, e.g. royalty trusts, 
synthetic oil fields. Public 
speculative instruments, e.g. 
oil warrants. Tailor-made flexibility over 
a swap with minimum 
basis risk. 
Option-like flexibility over 
a swap with minimum 
basis risk. 
No limit to the imagination 
of traders and marketers. 
The modification of 
traditional supply routes, 
when combined with 
hedging, may enable t<he 
client to eliminate the 
residual basis risk or 
convergence risk between 
t,he hedge and t,he physical. 
The ultimate design of a 
hedge; needs a deep 
analysis of the client's 
combined risks. 
Give equity, forex, interest 
rat,e t,raders and the 
general public the 
opportunity to take part in 
oil trading and diversify 
Dortfolios. 
11.4tpage 2

--- Page 533/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
physical oil. The return enjoyed by holders of the trust units 
depends partly on the reference oil price -Nymex WTI light sweet 
crude -and partly on other factors, the consumer price index, 
chargeable or production costs and taxes. 
This highly successful trust issue brought the issuer fresh 
finance whose reimbursement was directly linked to the market 
price for the anticipated field production and sales, and therefore 
did not damage the long term financial structure of the company. 
Its main risks are the basis risk between the crude produced -
Alaskan North Slope -and the price index used as a reference for 
the trust payoffs, and the political risk of changing environmental 
or production regulations. 
But the main risks for the unit holders me not negligible. 
Beside the basis risk, they are also exposed to inflation. Since oil is 
an important component of international trade and industry, there 
is a high correlation between oil prices and the inflation rate. This 
helps to explain the success of this issue among pension fund 
managers. Most of the other large risks involve potential conflicts 
of interest between the field owner and operator and the trust 
holders over reserve estimates, and therefore production costs as 
defined in the trust contract. 
The success of such trust issues hinges not only on excellent 
marketing but also on attractive pricing, depending on the need or 
will of the issuer to generate funds. Anyway the way is now paved 
for innovative oil companies to exploit a new source of exploration 
and production financing. 
11.4.4 Synthetic oil fields 
Some investment houses have issued synthetic oil field trusts as an 
alternative to royalty trusts designed to finance the physical 
development and operation of an oil field. Since they are engineered 
as a purely financial play, these long-term instruments do not 
create potential conflicts of interest over the assessment of 
production costs and the evolution of the regulatory and tax 
framework. 
However, synthetic oil fields have no physical production to 
underwrite them and must be covered by the writer using the 
whole range of futures and derivative oil markets, which brings 
liquidity risks and costs when hedging in the back months, and 
maturity exposure when rolling forward positions. If the issuer 
sells all the trust units quickly, the real success comes from the 
secondary market, if it can generate its own liquidity and provide 
good arbitrage opportunities. 
ll.4tpage 3

--- Page 534/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 535/964 ---
11.5 Pricing models 
Pricing is not the trickiest part of the deal when there is adequate 
competition -if not liquidity -in a derivative market. For 
example, a few elementary hypotheses and a large number of 
Monte Carlo3 simulations can provide a price for any structure of 
future payoffs. Such techniques were frequently used to price 
average and exotic options before satisfactory pricing formulae 
were proposed by theoreticians. Classical random models and 
simple hypotheses are widely used in the literature and are 
sometimes adapted for use in the markets. 
11.5.1 Log normality of outright prices 
This is the main hypothesis underlying the theory of rational option 
pricing, as developed in 19'73 by Black & Scholes4 and Mert~n.~ But 
the modern vision of prices as a random walk process was initiated 
years earlier by two French mathematicians, Louis Bachelier6 in 
1900 and Benoit Mandelbrotr in the 1960s. It is usually expressed 
in writing that the daily rate of return, for example, the daily 
official settlement prices provided by futures exchanges, follows a 
"brownian motion". In other words, it has a normal statistical 
distribution: 
Log(Ft/Ft-l) -Normal(,u,a) 
where, p = commodity appreciation rate, 
IS = price volatility. 
One of the quickest ways to accept or reject such a model is to 
plot a graph of the statistical distribution of the daily rate of return 
of outright prices and compare it with the equivalent normal 
distribution, for example, the first nearby Nymex WTI futures 
’Monte Carlo is a classical numerical analysis technique to value a 
risk by computing various simulations of adequate probabilities and 
measuring their statistical results. 
Black, F. & Scholes M., 1973, 'The pricing of options and corporate 
liabilities', Journal of Political Eco?zorny,V01.81, pp.637-659.’Merton, R.C., 1973, 'Theory of rational option pricing', Bell Journal 
of Economics ar7.d 1Mnnagemen.t Science, Vob.4, pp. 147-783 
Bachelier, L., 1900, 'ThCor-ie dc la spcculation', Annales de 1’Ecole 
Normale Supdrteu.rtt, Vvl.17, pp.21-86. ’Mandelbrot, B., 1963, 'The variation of certain speculative prices', 
Jourrzal of BusiTaess, Vo1.36, pp.394-419. 
11.5ipage 1

--- Page 536/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
July 1991 -March 1995 
50 
8 u
E 40 
L 
3
0 
30 Normal distribution -0 
z 
235 20 
z 
10 
0 
-7% -6% -5% -4% -3% -2% -1 % 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5% 604 7% 
Source: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.4 Distribution of daily returns for WTI first nea.rby 
contract from July 1991 to March 1995 (see Fig. 11.4). Further 
analysis, using third and fourth moments, trends and seasonal 
adjustments, should be carried out if these statistics are to be used 
in genuine pricing models. 
11.5.2 Normality of price spreads 
In the same vein, quality spreads and time-spreads are also said to 
have a normal statistical distribution. However, price differentials 
tend to be just as -if not more -volatile than outright prices, and 
highly subject to seasonal and disrupting effects. The WTI-Brent 
first nearby spread distribution for 1989 (see Fig. 11.5) provides a 
quick insight of the reasonableness of such a hypothesis when 
differentials are not too erratic. 
11.5.3 ARCH volatility 
Another class of models, known as auto-regressive conditional 
heteroscedastic (ARCH) models also GARCH and ARMACH ~ ~ 
are frequently used to forecast price volatility for option pricing. 
These assume that conditional standard deviations are a 
deterministic function of past returns. Their attraction is that they 
relax the very restrictive Black & Scholes hypothesis of constant 
price volatility. Option pricing models can then be adapted 
successfully either for the very short term, say intra-day trading, or 
for longer term maturities. 
11.5tpage 2

--- Page 537/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
18 -January- December 1989 i 
16 - I 
m 14 -
a,
0 
L 
3 Normal distnbution::10 -
0
-0 8-4-
Figure 11.5 Distribution, of daily return,s for WTI-Brent spread 
11.5.4 Market constraints 
Like random models, historical simulations may be used to verify 
the stability of hypotheses and to evaluate the results of 
hypothetical pricing or hedging strategies. The relevant data have 
first to be processed to allow for the effects of physical squeezes and 
price jumps. But the main limit on such techniques is the lack of 
reference data, as the Nymex WTI futures contract has only been 
trading since April 1983, with eighteen maturities since mid-1989, 
and maturities up to three years since December 1990. 
Moreover, the trader must be in the market and that cannot be 
captured by any mathematical or statistical model. A reliable and 
fair pricing model must be described in terms of market and not the 
reverse. Minor price differences can occur as a result of different 
profit expectations and evaluations of hedging risks. Apart from 
back-to-back transactions -where the trader has no risk exposure 
except credit and takes a few cents commission for matching the 
deals -most of the profits have to be generated by the hedging 
strategies and management. The initial biuoffer spread is not 
usually wide enough to cover the cost of an immediate and perfect 
hedge on the Nymex, even in a simple case. 
ll.5tpage 3

--- Page 538/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Figure 11.6 Convenience yield for nearby WTI futures 
11.5.5 Prices, term structure and risks 
As the Nymex provides futures contracts for maturities up to three 
years ahead, it can be used as a trading and hedging reference for 
short to medium-term liquidity. If most of the long-term risks 
included in the transaction the trader has concluded are 
transferred to the Nymex -or the IPE for hedges in Brent-related 
swaps -the remaining risks will lie in the time spread between 
the different maturities. As a result, movements in the term 
structuve -backwardation or contango -of the market will create 
profits and losses on the resulting portfolio. The futures price, F, 
ma,y be described using different parameters: the spot price S, 
financial interest rate is, the cost C, of holding and carrying stocks 
and the convenience yield C,. 
The convenience yield is the specific interest rate of the 
commodity. Because of the lack of reliable spot prices, the 
convenience yield may be better measured using homogeneous 
futures prices, for instance between the first two nearby contracts. 
The fii-st month's convenience yield or intrinsic oil interest rate, 
expressed as an annual rate may move from -50 per cent in 
contango to +200 per cent in backwardation (see Fig. 11.6). 
As it repi>esents short to medium-term effects related to 
physical supply and demand unbalance, the convenience yield is 
not constant, nor stable over time. A contango market -with 
nearby prices trading at a discount to longer maturities -creates 
11.5/p age 4

--- Page 539/964 ---
--- 
-- 
11 Long dated oil markets r 390,000 380,000 370,000 
-m 
360,000 
mD 
8 350,000
I> 
340,000 
330,000 
320,000 
Jan 89 Jan 90 Jan 91 
Source: API 
Figure 11.7 US crude oil stocks, end-week 
opportunities for physical arbitrage (buy and store) and is 
theoretically limited unless there is no storage capacity available at 
marginal cost. But, since there are no real limits to the factors, 
either political or economic, which may affect the physical crude oil 
markets, there is no equivalent arbitrage opportunity to set a limit 
to backwardation. 
Jul-94 
~ 35% at-94 
m -D Jan-95 
30% 
.-2; 
9 5 25% -.-
-Feb-95 
-2 20% a 
9m.-I15% -. . -_ . -~ ~ 
1O%l I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I 
Nbyl Nby3 Nby5 by7 NbyS Nbyll Nbyl3 Nbyl5 
Contract maturity 
Source: Elf Trading 
Figure 12.8 WTI historical price volatility, 30 day period 
ll.5tpage 5

--- Page 540/964 ---
I 
Oil Trading Manual 
Nearby WTI futures 45 11110190T 
40 
35 
20 
15 10 
~ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II III I I II I I II I I II I II I I II I I I I I I II II 
1991 1992 1993 1994 
Source: Elf Trading, Nymex 
Figure 11.9 WTI term structure and the Gulf war 
The fundamental characteristics of the behaviour of the 
convenience yield may be illustrated by comparing Fig. 11.6 with 
the American Petroleum Institute (API) weekly crude stocks (Fig. 
11.71, a proxy largely used for the assessment of crude physical 
markets. For instance, very high stocks in the second term of 1990 
lead to a stable contango and a very low convenience yield, though 
neither the correlation nor the causality are evident or stable. 
Moves in long-term prices will depend, first, on the 
convenience yield and, secondly, on the way price moves in the 
short-term are transferred to the longer term. In order to view how 
price moves are absorbed by the term maturity, one may plot the 
historical forward volatility stiwcture of Nymex WTI settlement 
prices, at the end of several months, calculated over the past 30 
(working) days, from July 1994 to February 1995 (see Fig. 11.8). 
Another example of term-structure moves and therefore risks, 
is to analyse the effects of the political, economic and 
supply/demand chaos induced by the Gulf crisis and then war from 
August 1990 to February 1991. We plotted the term structure of the 
Nymex WTI futures contracts (see Fig. 11.91, at different dates, on 
the same time-scale as the realisation of the first nearby prices. 
Extending futures prices to July 1994, using a simple linear 
extrapolation from the Nymex prices, illustrates the stability of 
medium-to-long-term prices, which move in a 20 to 26 dollars per 
barrel range while the first nearby prices move in a 17 to 40 dollars 
per barrel range in both a contango and a backwardated market. 
11.5tpage 6 I

--- Page 541/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
Convenience yield and related models may shed light on moves 
of oil prices term structures and induce specific hedging actions. 
Gibson & Schwartzs developed a model of futures prices with a 
stochastic convenience yield. The spot price is assumed to have a 
log normal-stationary distribution and the convenience yield to 
follow a correlated mean-reverting process. 
dS/S = p.dt + 03,.dz1 
dzl.dz2 = p.dt 
This model provides the basis for a model of price term 
structure, however its hypotheses are too restrictive and its 
parameters are difficult to measure. A larger class of models can be 
obtained by assuming there is a long term price for oil. Both the 
spot price S and the long term price L, at infinity, follow a joint 
stochastic process: 
dL = pL(L,t,).dt + wL(L,t).dz, 
To describe fully the term structuxes of futures prices and 
volatilities, and the associated boundary conditions, Elf Tradingg 
defines a flexible form of marginal convenience yield: 
C,(S,L,t) = P(t).Log(S/L) + at) 
The assumption of a long term oil price is a strong one which 
still needs to be proved. However, it gives a useful guideline in 
pricing and hedging long term oil derivatives. 
As pointed out above, the absorption of the convenience yield 
over time maturity must therefore be valued for any hedging 
purposes. For example, on futures, forwards and swaps, movements 
in inner months have a causal and correlated relationship with 
movements in outer months. Thei-efore the maturit.y exposure 
Gibson, R. & Schwarbz E., 1990, 'Stochastic convenicncc jield and 
the pricing of oil contingent claims', Jormml of Finance, Vo1.16, hTo.5, 
pp.1011-1029. 
9 see note 3. 
ll.5tpage 7

--- Page 542/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
induces a kind of dynamic hedging based on price and volatility 
term structure. However, the longer the maturity the more 
important will be other elements in the management of portfolio 
and contractual risks. 
11.5tpage 8

--- Page 543/964 ---
11.6 Contractual issues 
11.6.1 Need for a master agreement 
The market for long-term oil is still at an early stage of 
development when compared, for instance, to interest rate swaps, 
and its legal framework is not yet fully standardised. However 
banks and large oil companies are lobbying for the establishment of 
common or comparable rules of trading and therefore negotiate 
master agreements. Obviously there is still progress to be made as 
there is no reference master agreement such as the one provided by 
the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) for 
financial derivatives. A master agreement should encompass 
different principles to simplify the work of traders and 
administrative staff, and allow them to expand the business and to 
globalize positions for credit risk. In this way, a master agreement 
helps to unify procedures in response to any change in markets, 
publications, or laws. 
The aim of using a standardised master agreement is to 
provide liquidity in the market, as it ensures a certain degree of 
fungibility between transactions. Therefore it should shorten the 
biaoffer spread on classical swaps and options. This is in the 
interest of all participants, trading counterparts as well as clients 
and customers. 
11.6.2 Evaluation of credit risk 
The trend towards credit checking and management is very strong 
these days, especially in the long-term market for oil. Counterparts 
who are engaged to each other for periods of five, seven or ten years 
want to be secure on this point. 
Also the credit manager would have -in relation to the trader 
and the general management -to evaluate the risk of the 
transaction, either absolutely or relative to the market and price 
volatility. Either. way, the evaluation of the risk would have to be 
revised regularly for collateral needs. 
11.6.3 Implications for administrative procedures 
It is important to appreciate the sophisticated back-office 
accounting procedures and computer systems required for long-
term transactions, especially when compared with dealing on the 
forward, futures or short-term derivatives markets. The addition of 
11.6tpage 1

--- Page 544/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
tailor-made clauses like physical delivery possibilities may also 
complicate the administration of the transaction. 
Although a standardised master agreement eliminates the 
administrative constraints resulting from tailor-made contracts, its 
purpose is not to reduce the range of tailor-made strategies since it 
will never be able to provide for all the possibilities or the relentless 
creativity of the participants. 
11.6tpage 2

--- Page 545/964 ---
11.7 Using long dated derivatives 
11.7.1 An oil producer's price exposure 
A large oil company generally groups both exploration and 
production in its upstream activity. On the one hand, exploration is 
one of the most speculative businesses: the average cost of an oil 
drill is expressed in millions of dollars, and the average probability 
of failure is eight dry drills for nine exploratory ones. On the other 
hand, production requires a huge investment and has both a 
political and a strategic aspect. Therefore the 100 per cent hedge of 
the core exploration & production (E&P) businesses cannot be a 
goal in its own right. 
For an oil producer -especially a small one -global economic 
analysis should define the hedging requirements and objectives in 
order to ensure both the financial stability (repayment of liabilities) 
and the profitability (distribution to shareholders) of the company, 
and the successful development of new projects (putting existing 
reserves on stream or discovering new ones). The duration and 
payoff structure of the hedging transaction would depend on the 
specific needs of the company: 
profitability over one or more accounting yeads), 
duration of liabilities if debtors require guarantee of 
repayments, ensure the 
return on investment for long-term projects. 
Let us consider the following example. The objective of the 
producei. is to guarantee his profitability for the next four years. 
The producer first determines the minimum quantity Q that he is 
certain to produce during this period, whatever the economic 
conditions and operational constraints. 
Given his investments and costs, the producer can determine 
for the coming year and relative to this quantity Q, the cost of 
production per barrel P, and the minimum profit per barrel B, to 
reimburse creditors and to provide shareholders with a minimum 
profitability. The minimum price per barrel to achieve is therefore 
expressed by: 
P, = P,+ B, 
Among the various hedging strategies available to the 
company is one composed of two legs: 
11.7tpage 1

--- Page 546/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
0 a swap which ensures a Ph, fixed selling price, with Ph, 
greater than P,, for Qh barrels, and is aimed at 
reimbursing debtors, 
0 a put (option to sell) for a positive return on the remaining 
Q-Qh quantity, at a So strike price and Pro premium. In 
order to simplify the point, the put strike price is supposed 
to be equal to the cost of production: So= P,. 
It is obvious that if the realisable four-year swap price Ph, is 
not greater than P,, there is no opportunity, at this time, of 
entering into a profitable hedge. 
Then if, Ph, > P, , Qh will be determined at initiation by: 
Qh = {(B, + Pr,)/(Ph, -P, + Pro)}.& 
For example, 
Cost of production: P, = $15harrel, 
Minimum profit B, = $lharrel = > Pm= $16.00harrel 
1st case: 4-year swap value P,, = $16/barrel 
Q,/Q = 100 % 
2nd case: 4-year swap value Pl1, = $lSharrel 
Cost of $15/barrel put Pro = $0.7O/barrel 
3rd case: 4-year swap value Ph, = $20harrel 
Cost of $15/barrel put Pro = $0.45harrel 
Qh/Q = 27 % 
4th case: $-year swap value Ph, = $23harrel 
Cost of $15/barrel put Pro = $0.25harrel 
ll.'l/page 2

--- Page 547/964 ---
-- 
-- -- -- -- 
11 Long dated oil markets 
100% 
90% 
-- \80% \ -- \ 70% 
P 60% ----
No hedge $ 50% 
$ 40% 
30% 
20% 
10% 
0%. I I I 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 
Four year swap prrce, $?barrel 
3urce: Elf Trading 
Figure 17.10 Producer hedging stra.tegy with swaps an,d floors 
This example, although simple, shows that once the market 
prices reflect the profits from hedging, the producer only needs to 
lock in a small part of his production at a fixed price in order to 
cover both his minimum financial profit and the cost of the options 
to insure the remainder. Thus he retains in a "naturally 
speculative" way, the potential profit expected from the rest of his 
production. 
11.7.2 Using oil derivatives 
Generally speaking, the financial settlement of derivatives is based 
on the average pricing of a refeisence index during one 01’ several 
time periods. The index may be based on futures contracts, either 
as a reference to a specific maturity or as a forward rolling index. 
The concept of "nearby" is often used, the nearby N on each day 
being the Nth maturity currently traded for the futures contract. 
For an oil producing company, the usual hedge is the maturity 
closest to the physical market, i.e. the first nearby, except in cases 
where the sales and/or purchases are clearly based on another 
futures price. Typically, the last trading day of any futures contract 
is excluded from the first nearby reference price index, to avoid 
being caught in a purely technical spot-to-futures squeeze. 
Assuming that the company needs to hedge the next 
accounting year, and that the average market value for the year is 
$20/bbl, some possible hedging strategies are described below 
(prices are indicative and may change according to conditions): 
11.7tpage 3

--- Page 548/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Sale of a swap (Appendix 11.2) 
Selling a swap fixes the price for the producer, avoiding the risk of 
lower prices, but eliminating any profits from a future price rise. 
0 Fixed price $20/barrel. 
0 Strategy fully hedged. 
If prices are rising and the producer wants to limit his "loss" from 
the swap: he should consider the possibility of getting partially or 
completely out of the hedge and must decide to do it in time. 
Alternatively, he could consider selling a min-max swap instead. 
SELL A SWAP (FIXED PRICE $20/BARREL) 
\I 1.. 
-1 0 1,. 
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
FLOATING PRICE, $/BARREL 
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
without hedge - with hedge I I . 
rn rn 
rn rn 
0 I 
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
FLOATING PRICE, $/BARREL 
mce: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.11 Sale of a swap 
ll.7lpage 4

--- Page 549/964 ---
-- -- 
-- 
11 Long dated oil markets 
Sale of a min-max swap (Appendix 11-2) 
Selling a min-max swap fixes the producer's price over a specified 
range, thus exposing him to the risk of vei-y large price movements. 
0 Fixed price $20/barrel with limitation below $13harrel and 
above $30/barrel. 
0 Strategy to fix a limit to the potential swap cost by 
accepting a limit to the potential profit at a bottom value. 
8-
6 --'7 - 4 --
W a: 2 -- \*a: 2 I& O-
b--2 
LL 0 -4LT 
LL 
~~-6 
-8 
-1 0 - \*\.-
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
40 
111 
g 35
2 30 
3 25 
5 20 
W9 
15 r2 10 
2 5 
U 
0 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
FLOATING PRICE: $BARREL 
wrce: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.12 Sale of a mia-max swap 
11.7Ipage 5

--- Page 550/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Purchase of a floor swap (Appendix 11.3) 
Purchasing a floor swap protects the producer from a fall in prices, 
but still allows him to profit from a price rise. 
0 Floor price $19/barrel, initial premium $l/barrel. 
0 Strategy to buy insurance against a price decrease and to 
keep the profits from any probable price increase. Choosing 
a floor price that is a little out of the money will minimise 
the premium paid. 
BUYA FLOOR SWAP (STRIKE $19/BARREL) 
10 -
-
W 
6-a 
m 4-
E U2 2-
U 
0- + + 
-2 -
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
FLOATING PRICE, $/BARREL 
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
,ource: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.13 Purchase of a floor swap 
ll.'l/page 6

--- Page 551/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
Sale of a ceiling swap (Appendix 11.4) 
Selling a ceiling swap enhances a producer's profit in a stable 
market. 
0 Ceiling price $2 lharrel, initial premium $l/barrel. 
0 Strategy assumes that market prices will remain stable and 
below $2l/barrel. In this case, the premium received increases 
the profit. But, apart from the $lharrel initial income there is 
no hedge and no protection against a large price decrease. 
SELL A CEILING SWAP (STRIKE $21WARREL) 
2T 
-84 \ 
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
1 I without hodgo with hedge I without hodgo with hedge ~
~ 
I I. .. . I I . . 
-..-’i . 
W n2 15 
0 
55 c I 
10 10 12 12 14 14 16 16 18 18 20 20 22 22 24 24 26 26 28 28 30 30 
FLOATING PRICE. $BARREL FLOATING PRICE. $BARREL 
ource: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.14 Sale of a ceiling swap 
11.7tpage 7

--- Page 552/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
Sale of a collar (Appendix 11.5) 
Selling a collar protects the producer from price movements outside 
a specified range, but exposes him to the risk of smaller price 
changes within the specified range. 
0 $18-22/barrel collar sold with no initial premium. 
0 Strategy protects producer below $18/barrel with no 
insurance cost, except that the global profit on the sales will 
be limited to $22/barrel. But such a collar gives a no hedge 
inside the $18-22/barrel price range. 
SELL A COLLAR ($18-22/BARREL ZERO OPTION) 
lo T 
-
W III III 
a 
m64 
E 
LL 
e 
-10 1 
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
FLOATING PRICE, $/BARREL 
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
. without hedoe with hedQe I ~ 
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
FLOATING PRICE, $/BARREL 
mce: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.15 Sale of a collar 
ll.'l/page 8

--- Page 553/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
Producer participation (Appendix 11.6) 
Selling a participation swap fixes the producer's price at an agreed 
minimum level, but allows him to enjoy a specified share of the 
profits from any future price rise. 
50% participation, fBed price $19/barrel, with no initial 
premium. 
Strategy in the middle of the swap sale and the floor 
purchase. 
50% PRODUCER PARTICIPATION (FIXED PRCE $19rBARREL) 
15 T 
-10 1 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
FLOATINS PRICE $/BARREL 
RESULTON PHYSICAL CRUDE VALUE 
40 
111 
g 35
2 30 
3 25 
5 20 
W9 
15 
LT2 10 
2 5 
U 
0 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
FLOATING PRICE. $BARREL 
3urce: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.16 Producer participation 
11.7tpage 9

--- Page 554/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
11.7.3 Hedging strategies 
Violent movements in the oil price market structure create a classic 
hedging problem: how does a producer respond to changes in 
backwardation and contango? 
Backwardation 
Spot prices are higher than longer term prices. Physical crude oil 
has an added value. The producer is under pressure to sell at 
prompt prices and not to support the backwardation spread. Any 
hedge using a future maturity will be equivalent to a forward sale 
below the spot price. It will eventually lead to a loss if market 
prices do not fall at the same rate. This was the case, for instance, 
during 1989 when the market was in backwardation all year long, 
locked in a trading range of less than three dollars per barrel. 
The producer may be reluctant to hedge. The short-term 
benefits are not apparent, unless a market move or reversal in the 
price structure is expected. But a longer-term hedge could be much 
more attractive. The proportional effect of backwardation is 
reduced -there could even be a contango in the long-term -and 
long-term values can be very profitable indeed. Careful long-term 
analysis may yield good hedging opportunities, especially when 
there is a strong backwardation as a result of a major crisis. 
Contango structure 
Spot prices are lower than term prices. Physical oil has less value 
in an over-supplied market. The producer will face difficulties 
selling his crude, but he can sell on the futures market at a higher 
price. As he can fix his hedge or his future sales at a better price 
than the spot market, hedging will generate profits if market prices 
are not increasing at the same rate. 
The short-term benefits from hedging are obvious, while a 
longer-term hedging strategy could be less advantageous ~ even if 
selling $2 per barrel above the spot seems to be very attractive. To 
put it simply, if the spot price is very low, $17 per barrel for 
example, selling the long-term at $19 per barrel should be regarded 
with caution. 
Trend market 
A trend often amplifies a backwardation or a contango. Thus, an 
upward trend may sustain or even increase the backwardation in 
11.7tpage 10

--- Page 555/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
the market, while a downward trend will have the same effect in a 
contango in the market -see, for example, the period from March 
1990 to June 1990. 
In a strongly trended market, the producer will be even more 
reluctant to hedge during a backwardation and even more inclined 
to hedge during a contango. It is important, however, to develop an 
approach to hedging that is in line with a company's short, medium 
and long-term objectives. 
The ultimate question is whether to anticipate the reversal of a 
trend or simply to wait for the reversal and act just after it, even if 
the top or bottom of the market is hist.oiy. 
11.7.4 Tax issues 
Taxes are complex and specific to each country, location and case. 
It is therefore important to analyse possible hedging strategies 
under different production and financial tax constraints. The 
following cases may shed light on such difficult issues. 
Case 7: no specific taxes on crude production 
In this case, the crude produced is treated in the same way as any 
other trading commodity. Profits or losses resulting from these 
physical sales, like profits or losses from trading and hedging, are 
part of the company's income. One does not need to separate the 
crude sales from the hedging for fiscal computations. Thus the 
hedging policy is straightforward and has to be planned on 100 per 
cent of the volume of crude produced. This is generally the case in 
the United States and US producers have no fiscal constraints on 
hedging their production over short or longer-term maturities. 
Case 2: royaltiea 
Royalties represent government or fiscal authority property rights 
to a percentage of the crude produced, either on a financial basis or 
in kind. In this case, the royalty share of the crude produced is not 
controlled at all by the producer and will usually be excluded in 
proportion for hedging purposes. 
Case 3:petroleum or production tax 
In the main producing areas, and especially in the UK, there is a 
specific production tax. Apart from any production royalty or 
transfers to government entities, there are additional taxes for the 
11.7/page 11

--- Page 556/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
sale of physical equity crude, depending on specific fiscal rules, that 
do not apply to the hedging of paper crude. The financial results of 
any hedging strategy are therefore not directly comparable to the 
financial results from physical sales. To correct for this difference 
the hedge volume should be adjusted to reflect the fiscal 
environment, as illustrated in the example and formulae below. If 
such an adjustment is not made, the hedge volume is equal to the 
physical volume (100 per cent hedging ratio): 
0 if prices increase, the result is a physical gain and a hedge 
loss; but, as the strategy is over-hedged compared with 
after-tax computations, the result is a loss. 
0 if prices decrease, the result is a physical loss and a hedge 
gain; but the after-tax result will be a gain. 
The main tax issues can summarised as: 
0 tax X % on production, 
0 tax Y % on company profits, including hedging profits. 
Assuming the company is profitable at the current market price P, 
this translates into, for a prime cost of production P,, a yearly 
production of Q barrels and a hedge over Qh barrels at a Ph swap 
price: 
nominal after-tax sales = (1-Yj.(l- X).Q.P 
production profits, if P is greater than the prime cost 
P, = (1-Y).(1-X).Q.(P -P,) 
hedging results = (1-Yj.Qh.(Ph -Pj 
To insure the next yearly company results, 
R = (1-Y).(l -X).Q.(P -PJ + (1-Yj.Q1l.(P1l -PI 
one needs no price sensitivity, 
dWdP = 0 
which is better expressed by the equation: 
(l-Yj.(l-Xj.Q-(l-Y).Qh= 0 
Therefore, the company need not be fully hedged on the yearly Q 
production, but an under-hedge is enough, given these simple but 
reasonable tax constraints: 
Qh = (1~x1.Q 
11.7tpage 12

--- Page 557/964 ---
0 
11 Long dated oil markets 
Example 
Petroleum tax: 75 % 
Company income tax: 35 % 
Yearly production volume: Q = 6 million barrels 
After-tax hedging volume: Qh = 25 56, Q = 1.5 million barrels 
Conclusion on. tax issues 
Any other system of official prices or taxes would have an impact on 
the hedging strategy. In some cases, one could decide not to hedge, 
or, to apply a global management hedging strategy disconnected 
from the physical production and sales, it being understood that, 
whatever taxes are, if prices fall the profitability of an oil producer 
is always reduced. 
To summarise, taking into account tax and royalty issues leads 
to an under-hedged st.rat.egy. 
Tax calculations are often obscure in advance and the stability 
of tax calculation methods are not guaranteed. It could be difficult 
to accept a long-term strategy based on these hypotheses, but this 
should not alter the decision process. Many other parameters, such 
as production and operational risks, are not completely certain. 
Approximations and hypotheses provide useful guidelines and the 
decision should always allow for an under-hedge compared to the 
"ideal" calculation. 
11.7.5 Basis risk 
Several hundred different crude oil qualities are produced around 
the world. The price of a crude is mainly based on: 
the price levels for the related geographical production and 
selling areas, 
a price adjustment, for quality. 
The value of a crude depends on the market price for refined 
products obtained from the crude. A crude with a high yield of light 
products -kerosene, naphtha, unleaded gasoline -would 
therefore have a higher value on the market than a crude with a 
high yield of heavy fuel oil. 
Geographical and quality differential risks have to be taken 
into account when analysing any hedging scheme. For example, 
long-term spreads between WTI and Brent may create interesting 
opportunities for crude arbitrage between the US and Europe. 
11.7/page 13

--- Page 558/964 ---
-- 
-- -- 
Oil Trading Manual 
-3.00 
2.50 2.00 
-jp, - " ’1 2 \% 1 .50 --4
e64 
1 .oo 
0.50 
0.00 7 
Source: Elf Trading 
Figure 11.17 WTI-Brent crude price spread, post Gulf war 
Table 11.3 Trading characteristics of benchmark crudes 
WTI Brent Dubai 
E.rchange Nymex IPE IPE/Simex 
Mattcrity 22 traded maturities 9 months 7 months 
ovcr 3 ycars 
106 million bid 40 million b/d not reliable 
400-410 million 120-150 million not rcliablc 
barrels biirrels 
826 kgh3 867 kglm3 869 kg/m3 
40 38 31 
7.63 7.53 7.25 
0.28 0.35 1.96 
-18°C -1°C -18°C 
6 cst 7.5 cst 16.5 cst, 
The three main trading areas and crude benchmarks are: 
0 America with WTI as a reference, 
0 Europe and Mrica with Brent as a reference, 
0 Asia with Dubai as a reference. 
These three reference crudes are traded on futures markets 
but with very different scales of activity (see Table 11.3). Brent and 
Dubai are also traded on two active forward markets. Obviously 
ll.'l/page 14

--- Page 559/964 ---
11 Long dated oil markets 
these different scales of liquidity and trading maturities have an 
impact on derivative markets. The Nymex Light Sweet Crude Oil 
(WTI) contract with listed maturities of up to 36 months ahead, is 
the most active for very long-term maturities such as ten years. But 
Brent is gaining ever wider acceptance as the international 
benchmark crude, and is currently estimated to be used in the 
pricing of up to 65% of the worlds crude oils and is now available 
on the Singapore exchange (Simex). 
Given the evolution of crude oil production and new 
developments towards heavier grades; quality references could 
move to heavier indexes. 
In order for the producer to avoid the expensive residual basis 
risk, it is often worth considering a hedging strategy directly 
indexed on any Platt’s or Argus reference. 
11.7lpage 15

--- Page 560/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 561/964 ---
11.8 Conclusions 
Oil and gas are increasingly important primary sources of energy. 
Recent developments and future environmental constraints could 
even expand their role compared with other energy commodities, 
since nuclear power and coal are not regarded as safe or desirable 
alternatives. The long-term strategic role of oil therefore creates 
both basic and sophisticated requirements for risk management. 
Both the oil industry as a whole, and a number of other important 
economic agents, have recently started to re-appraise the impact of 
oil prices on their traditional businesses. 
New market developments have always generated fear and 
suspicion concerning speculation and the risks involved. But oil 
futures markets and long-term oil derivative markets have proven 
their efficiency and their usefulness both as a stabiliser and as a 
shock-absorber throughout the extremely difficult market 
conditions of the recent Gulf crisis. 
Long-term oil markets are continuing to expand and aim to 
satisfying a highly diversified range of hedging and speculative 
requirements. They are attracting more and more companies. This 
is the course of history. But, their presence is often temporary and 
the number of true and effective counterparts -large oil 
companies, trading entities, banks and traders -remains fairly 
stable over time, at around ten companies. 
ll.8tpage 1

--- Page 562/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 563/964 ---
Appendix 11.1 
Sale of aswap 
Terminology 
Swap or fixed price swap: 
Fixed price payer = "fixed price buyer" 
Floating price payer = "fixed price seller" 
Settlement calculation 
The "Fixed Amount" in respect of a Determination Period shall be 
the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the Fixed Price. 
The "Floating Amount" in respect of a Determination Period 
shall be the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the 
Floating Price. 
If the Fixed Amount is greater than the Floating Amount, then 
the Fixed Price Payer shall pay to the Floating Price Payer the 
amount by which the Fixed Amount exceeds the Floating Amount; 
or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Fixed Amount, then 
the Floating Price Payer shall pay to the Fixed Price Payer the 
amount by which the Floating Amount, exceeds the Fixed Amount. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation. for a fixed price swap 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY: 
-FIXED PRICE PAYER: ELF TRADING 
-FLOATING PRICE PAYER: PRODUCER 
~COMMODITY: Wl 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 1Z3119 5 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01/01/92TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01iOli93 TO 12i31i93 
FROM 01iOli94TO 12i31i94 
FROM 01/01/95TO 12i31/95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 BBL 
-FIXED PRICE (OR FIXED PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 20 
$/BAR RE L 
~ FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE OF 
THE DAILY SETTLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
Appendix ll.l/page 1

--- Page 564/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 565/964 ---
Appendix 11.2 
Sale of a min-max swap 
Terminology 
Fixed price swap with limited variations. Equivalent to a call 
spread or a put spread without premium, the fixed price giving the 
equilibrium point. It is mainly designed to set a limit to the 
financial amounts to be exchanged. 
Fixed price payer = "fixed price buyer" 
Floating price payer = "fixed price seller" 
Settlement calculation 
The "Maximum Amount" in respect of a Determination Period shall 
be the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the 
Maximum Price. 
The "Minimum Amount" in respect of a Determination Period 
shall be the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the 
Minimum Price. 
If the Floating Amount is less than the Minimum Amount, 
then the Fixed Price Payer shall pay to the Floating Price Payer 
the amount by which the Fixed Amount exceeds the Minimum 
Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Minimum Amount 
and less than the Fixed Amount, then the Fixed Price Payer shall 
pay to the Floating Price Payer the amount by which the Fixed 
Amount exceeds the Floating Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Fixed Amount and 
less than the Maximum Amount, then the Floating Price Payer 
shall pay to the Fixed Price Payer the amount by which the 
Floating Amount exceeds the Fixed Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Maximum Amount, 
then the Floating Price Payer shall pay to the Fixed Price Payer 
the amount by which the Maximum Amount exceeds the Fixed 
Amount. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation for a fixed price miia-max swap 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY 
-FIXED PRICE PAYER ELF TRADING 
-FLOATING PRICE PAYER PRODUCER 
-COMMODITY WT 
Appendix 119/page 1

--- Page 566/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 1 2/3 1 /95 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01/01/92 TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01/01/93 TO 12/31/93 
FROM 01/01/94 TO 12/31/94 
FROM 01/01/95 TO 12/31/95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 BBL 
-FIXED PRICE (OR FIXED PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 20 $/BBL 
-MAXIMUM PRICE (OR MAX PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 30 $/BBL 
-MINIMUM PRICE (OR MIN PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 13 $/BBL 
-FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE OF 
THE DAILY SETrLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
Appendix ll.2ipage 2

--- Page 567/964 ---
Appendix 11.3 
Purchase of a floor swap 
Terminology 
It is an option designed to profit from any price decrease. The name 
"put" is preferably used for single options. 
Floor price = strike price 
Premium payer = option buyer 
Premium receiver = opt.ion seller or writer 
Settlement calculation 
The "Floor Amount" in respect of a Determination Period shall be 
the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the Floor Price. 
If the Floor Amount is greater than the Floating Amount, then 
the Premium Receiver shall pay to the Premium Payer the amount 
by which the Floor Amount exceeds the Floating Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Floor Amount, then 
no payments shall be made. 
In addition, the Premium Payer shall pay to the Premium 
Receiver the Premium on the Premium Payment Date. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation for a floor swap 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY: 
-PREMIUM PAYER: PRODUCER 
-PREMIUM RECEIVER: ELF TRADING 
-COMMODITY: Wrl 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 1Z3119 5 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01101192TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01iOli93 TO 12/31i93 
FROM 01iOli94TO 12i31i94 
FROM 01/01/95TO 12/31/95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 BBL 
-FLOOR PRICE (OR FLOOR PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 20 5iBBL 
-FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE OF 
THE DAILY SETTLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
-PREMIUM: 1 $k’BBL 
-PREMIUM PAYMENT DATE: DATE DD + 1 
Appendix 11.Wpage 1

--- Page 568/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 569/964 ---
Appendix 11.4 
Sale of a ceiling swap 
Terminology 
Again the terminology ceiling swap or cap is preferred to the call 
one which refers to a single option. 
Settlement calculation 
The "Ceiling Amount" in respect of a Determination Period shall be 
the product of the Relevant Quantity multiplied by the Ceiling 
Price. 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Ceiling Amount, 
then the Premium Receiver shall pay to the Premium Payer the 
Amount by which the Floating Amount exceeds the Ceiling 
Amount; or 
If the Ceiling Amount is greater than the Floating Amount, 
then no payments shall be made. 
In addition, the Premium Payer shall pay to the Premium 
Receiver the Premium on the Premium Payment Date. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation for a ceiling swap 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY: 
-PREMIUM PAYER: ELF TRADING 
-PREMIUM RECEIVER: PRODUCER 
-COMMODITY: WI 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 1Z3119 5 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01/01/92TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01i01193 TO 12/31193 
FROM 01i01194TO 12i31i94 
FROM 01101195TO 12/31/95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 EEL 
-CEILING PRICE (OR CEILING PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 20 
$/BBL 
-FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE OF 
THE DAILY SETTLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
-PREMIUM: 1 $;’BBL 
-PREMIUM PAYMENT DATE: DATE DD + 1 
Appendix 11A/page 1

--- Page 570/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 571/964 ---
Appendix 11.5 
Collar 
Terminology 
A Collar is equivalent to a call option minus a put option. It can be 
called a zero option if the strike prices are designed to cancel the 
premiums. 
It is easier to consider that the buyer is the one whose 
resulting risk is long i.e. the call buyer and put seller. Then the 
premium payer is the one who has bought the most expensive 
option. 
Settlement calculation 
If the Floating Amount is less than the Floor Amount, then the 
Collar Buyer shall pay to the Collar Seller the amount by which the 
Floor Amount exceeds the Float.ing Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Floor Amount and 
less than the Ceiling Amount, then no payments shall be made; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Ceiling Amount, 
then the Collar Seller shall pay to the Collar Buyer the amount by 
which the Floating Amount, exceeds t,he Ceiling Amount. 
In addition, the Premium Payer shall pay to the other party 
the Premium on the Premium Payment Date. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation. for a collar 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY: 
-COLLAR BUYER: ELF TRADING 
-COLLAR SELLER: PRODUCER 
~COMMODITY: Wl 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 1Z3119 5 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01iOli92TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01iOli93 TO 12i31i93 
FROM 01iOli94TO 12i31i94 
FROM 01/01/95TO 12i31i95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 BBL 
-FLOOR PRICE (OR FLOOR PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 185IBBL 
-CEILING PRICE (OR CEILING PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 22 $BBL 
~ FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE OF 
THE DAILY SETTLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
-PREMIUM: 0 $;’BBL 
Appendix lld/page 1

--- Page 572/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 573/964 ---
Appendix 11.6 
Producer participation 
Terminology 
A participation is a mix of swap and option, or a mix of same strike 
prices options, in different proportions. For example, a X % 
producer participation is equal to [(l-Xi.swap -X.put1 or to [(l-
X).call -l.put1. It includes a fixed price for calculation purposes. 
Fixed price payer = "fixed price buyer" 
Floating price payer = "fixed price seller" (the producer) 
Settlement calculation 
If the Fixed Amount is greater than the Floating Amount, then the 
Fixed Price Payer shall pay to the Floating Price Payer the amount 
by which the Fixed Amount exceeds the Floating Amount; or 
If the Floating Amount is greater than the Fixed Amount, then 
the Floating Price Payer shall pay to the Fixed Price Payer the 
amount equal to the product of the amount by which the Floating 
Amount exceeds the Fixed Amount multiplied by the amount equal 
to 1.00 minus the participation rate. 
In addition, if there is a premium, the Premium Payer shall 
pay to the other party the Premium on the Premium Payment 
Date. 
Example 
Elf telex confirmation for a producer participation swap 
WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING SWAP CONCLUDED ON DATE 
DD WITH YOUR COMPANY. 
-FIXED PRICE PAYER: ELF TRADING 
-FLOATING PRICE PAYER: PRODUCER 
~ COMMODITY: WTI 
-EFFECTIVE DATE: DATE DD 
-TERMINATION DATE: 12’31195 
-DETERMINATION PERIODS: FROM 01/01/92 TO 12/31/92 
FROM 01/01/93 TO 12/31/93 
FROM 01/01/94 TO 12/31/94 
FROM 01/01/95 TO 12/31/95 
-QUANTITY PER DETERMINATION PERIOD: 1,500,000 EEL 
-FIXED PRICE (OR FIXED PRICE PER DETERMINATION PERIOD): 19 $/BBL 
-FLOATING PRICE: FOR EACH DETERMINATION PERIOD THE AVERAGE or 
THE DAILY SETTLEMENT PRICES OF THE SECOND MONTH AS QUOTED BY 
NYMEX. 
-PARTICIPATION RATE: 50 % 
-PREMIUM (IF ANY): 0 $!BBL 
Appendix 11.6/page 1

--- Page 574/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 575/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics 
Robin Burley 12.1 Introduction
12.2 Scheduling
12.2.1 Lifting order
12.2.2 Production terminals
12.2.3 Scheduling products
12.3 Bookouts
12.3.1 The Brent market
12.3.2 Executing a bookout
12.3.3 Discounting for advanced payment
12.3.4 Reasons for bookingout
12.3.5 Reasons for not bookingout
12.3.6 Other forward markets
12.4 Nomination and documentation
12.4.1 Standard documentation
12.4.2 Letter of indemnity
12.4.3 Letter of credit
12.5 Inspection
12.6 Demurrage
12.7 Shipping operations
12.7.1 Risks and opportunities
12.7.2 Single voyage
12.7.3 Time charter
12.7.4 Vessel arbitrage
12.7.5 Alternatives on discharge
12.8 Terminals, trans-shipment and storage
12.8.1 Terminals management
12.8.2 Spot storage
12.8.3 Term storage
12.8.4 Trans-shipment across jetty
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 576/964 ---
12.8.5 Terminal regulations
12.8.6 General points
12.8.7 Discharge
Appendix 
12.1 Instruction to inspectors
12.2 Sample Brent bookout telex
12.3 Sample letter of indemnity
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 577/964 ---
12.1 Introduction 
In the past, the primary role of operations and logistics was to service the needs of the shipping system, moving production off-take, satisfying reﬁning demands, managing pipelines and implementing marketing plans. T
oday, the requirement is also 
to add value to a deal, and to be creative. Nowadays, a trading organisation may rely on its operations personnel to monitor and, to some extent, control the activities of its traders besides providing support. The day of the easy oil trade is over – traders have to work for a living. And logistics has become all important to proﬁtability. 
In fact the logistics picture has become so signiﬁcant, that 
many leading independent traders and oil companies have taken the additional step of interposing the operations or logistics man-agement into the approval system for a deal – a trend welcomed, as, for a time, many operations personnel were regarded by the traders as a sort of appendage in the business, indeed almost subservient. 
The word “operations” conjures up different views depend-
ing on experiences and attitudes within companies. In a produc-ing company it may refer purely to the act of drawing up and executing a loading programme from a given set of production expectations. For the reﬁner
, it may include the crude delivery 
programme and product off-take by whatever means. It may also include some input into the actual running of plant within the reﬁnery – optimisation – depending on deliveries and prevailing prices. For many it will include a shipping, pipeline, rail, truck or storage interface. 
Prior to the 1973/74 crisis, operations and logistics were con-
cerned with cost-minimisation. Transportation was a signiﬁcant element in the price of oil and the objective was cheaper ship-ping. Most aspects of company operational planning at this time were shipping oriented, since an integrated company’
s proﬁts 
were linked to its shipping costs. Oil acquisition, facilities plan-ning and even reﬁning became ship driven. Vessels were fully employed and cargoes had to be found – or in the case of multi-products carriers ﬁtted to meet vessel constraints. Operations personnel within companies were governed or even ordered by those who controlled the shipping. The short-term linear pro-gramming model for a reﬁning system relied heavily for solution accuracy upon a mass of freight data. 
And companies operated 
tonnage exchanges to reduce inefﬁciencies based on ton-days or ton-miles of service. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.1/page 1

--- Page 578/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
After the ﬁrst oil crisis, higher oil prices shifted the empha -
sis of operations on to supply management rather than costs. Hanging on to term arrangements became of primary impor
-
tance, despite fears of increases in HGT (Host Government Take – sometimes known as “Higher” Government Take – hiking the price on a term deal – sometimes retroactively). Maintaining supply became the priority and shipping inefﬁciencies began to creep in the expense of the necessary acquisition of crude or product further disguised by the growing oversupply of shipping. In the case of the majors, many became decentralised allowing their overseas associates to run the business almost independ-ently of the head ofﬁce managing their own shipping and supply arrangements. The operator now focused on timing, location and grade exchanges, trading off what acquisitions he had made in order to have a stake in the play
. 
In the 1980s, changes in the nature of oil trading prompted 
a further shift in the role of operations and logistics. Falling world oil demand meant that term supply was no longer the sole route to survival. The growth of spot trading and the emergence of paper markets created a new method of doing business, weak-ening the inﬂuence of the OPEC pricing system. And the price crash of 1985/86 ushered in a more volatile world for oil trading in which players had to think fast on their feet; be capable of using all of the tools available whether paper or physical, wet or dry
. Long term planning no longer ruled the logistics world. 
12.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 579/964 ---
12.2 Scheduling 
12.2.1 Lifting order 
An onshore production or loading system may have several part-ners. Substantial inventory may be available throughout the month. V
ia a co-ordinator, the partners can usually agree a lifting 
order for a month on a logical progression based on their total production. Partners may be invited to propose their liftings for a month and these are then sorted and a deﬁnitive set of windows (laydays) for lifting each cargo determined and issued by the co-ordinator. 
Many of the earlier North Sea ﬁelds were offshore loaded, 
and some still are. 
A lifting order has to be determined to estab-
lish a loading programme – the subject of much debate in trans-portation agreements. The key questions in determining the rules for lifting are: 
•	What minimum stock a participant should have in order to qualify for a lifting? 
•	How far ahead should the lifting order be binding – in other words set in concrete, regardless of operational interruptions that may distort entitlements? 
•	Can the lifting order be changed under certain circumstances? 
•	If the weather is bad, can a tanker sail with a part cargo and, if so, what is the minimum acceptable from a safety and cargo trading aspect? 
Many of these ﬁelds were developed at a time when the price of oil was becoming dynamic and neither the current price struc-tures (e.g. marker-related pricing of many grades), nor price management tools such as futures and swaps existed. 
Larger participants, invariably majors and reﬁners, were 
able to deal with changes in a programme by virtue of having the facility to exchange, sell or reﬁne a cargo in their own systems or between themselves. Besides, if they lifted frequently
, statisti-
cally they were less likely to take a price “hit”. 
Smaller companies, however, with fewer liftings and without 
the ﬂexibility of the majors found themselves at the mercy of the weather
, the market and in some cases the companies to whom 
they may have committed to sell. Such participants therefore had to make decisions on whether to go it alone – lift a full cargo or whatever cargo could be lifted if weather or other circumstances intervened – or amalgamate their entitlements with other larger 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.2/page 1

--- Page 580/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
participants thus sharing in more frequent liftings. The different 
ﬁelds and lifting systems had various rules for agreeing an amal -
gamation or revising it. Smaller participants were often driven into amalgamation through a bad experience and felt cornered by the purchase terms offered by the majors. 
For example, take a ﬁeld of three participants A,B,C, of 
share holding 46 per cent, 44 per cent and 10 per cent respec-tively in an offshore loading system, which is serviced by two tankers (one of 450,000 barrels capacity and the other 550,000 barrels). 
Assume some simple rules for determining the lifting order, 
namely that the tankers load in rotation and there is always a buffer stock of say 500,000 barrels minimum. 
After a lifting, pro-
duction is assumed to be made up to replace that lifted and the participant with the highest paper entitlement is projected to lift. If a tanker has loaded 60 per cent of cargo and cannot load more due to bad weather she may sail. The “binding” part of the pro-gramme may be for 2 months and there are 3 tanker liftings per month on average. 
Company C may expect to lift number 7 – the ﬁrst cargo in 
the month after the “binding programme” – but may ﬁnd, due to the changed order of rotation of the liftings of the tankers or the fact that 1 or 2 liftings may have been short loaded, that they may be deferred by several liftings perhaps to number 10 and thus into another month. 
As is obvious, this works to the detriment of the smaller 
company
, perhaps in terms of price in a volatile market and cer-
tainly in terms of cash ﬂow. Perhaps worse can be the case where the company gets the smaller tanker lifting or is short-loaded due to weather – their “turn” may not come around again for some time. Indeed the smaller the percentage share holding the greater the risk of this happening. 12.2.2 Production terminals 
Production terminals have operational requirements determined by the producer or joint venture producers each of whom have an equity share in production. W
e will consider some of the operat-
ing aspects of the joint venture systems here. 
Such systems are managed by a party (usually one of the 
equity participants) on behalf of the co-venturers. The operator has guidelines drawn up under a joint operating agreement which regulate the amount of stock each participant may hold both physically in the terminal and pipeline system, and on paper
. The 
order of lifting and thus the lifting programme may be determined 
12.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 581/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
by a statistical method, a deﬁned on-paper oil entitlement level triggering successive liftings in order, or may be a more gentle-manly arrangement where participants nominate when they require a lifting, or in some cases a combination of both. 
In most cases, programmes for any month are usually 
deﬁned during the ﬁrst half of the previous month and advised as such to all participants. 
The determination of stock entitlement to any participant 
may not be a simple matter since, in a complex collecting and dis-tribution system, each ﬁeld may have different qualities. 
This is usually overcome by evaluating the quality and hence 
value of the individual inputting ﬁelds versus the ﬁnal blend. This may be done by 1 of 2 distinct methods: 1. Negotiation 
The participants will agree, perhaps on a quarterly basis, on the value of the inputting streams. This value will then either be related to volumes available to participants or result in a cash settlement between participants. 2. Mechanistic valuation 
Samples of the crudes are taken over a period of time to form a composite sample – say one month – and then analysed. 
Again, 
varying methods exist: in a typical mechanistic valuation the agreement will have established rules for valuation usually based on particular cuts of the barrel. 
For example these might be 3 distillation cuts from the 
liquids in the sample representing naphtha, gasoil and heavy fuel oil (the latter with adjustments for sulphur and viscosity). Each cut volume is then valued at market (based on published product prices from an agreed source) and a composite value for the crude drawn up – a sort of basic gross product worth. Rather than reim-burse each other in money terms, adjustments to participants’ stocks are made in equivalent volume terms of entitlement to the ﬁnal blend. 
Mechanistic valuation is used in crude production systems 
such as Brent and Forties and also in receiving and distribution terminals such as the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP). 12.2.3 Scheduling products 
The scheduling of products poses the operator with a different set of problems and is a function of reﬁning which may be 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.2/page 3

--- Page 582/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
affected by crude input and capacity problems, interruptions, 
storage capability and of course the key factor – speciﬁcation requirements. 
Many products are ﬁnished by blending in tankage at a site 
which could be on or off the reﬁnery. The operator may be involved in scheduling the blending procedure. At such time as a product may be loaded onto a tanker, the quality may be “off-spec” (not meet the speciﬁcation required under the contract of sale or required for marketing into a particular area), at which point decisions have to be made: 
•	Can the cargo be re-blended up to spec on board the vessel? 
•	Will the cargo need to be pumped ashore for re-blending or treatment to meet spec? 
•	Can the cargo be sold off-spec as is to buyer without severe penalty? 
•	Can the cargo be sold as is to meet the requirements of another buyer or another country’
s speciﬁcations? 
The ﬁnal solution may depend on how familiar the operator is with the economics of the various options. 
12.2/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 583/964 ---
12.3 Bookouts 
The 1980s witnessed the growth of paper markets. Such markets included forwards and futures. Operators were familiar with physical problems but the forward markets brought a new breed of problem not seen before. 
In the ﬁrst instance, operators had to come to terms with the 
bookout. Many people associate this with the Brent and other forward markets, although it has to be noted that settling dif-ferences has been a feature of other non-forward markets for some time, where trading of the same cargo has taken place. Nevertheless in our example we shall use the Brent market. 12.3.1 The Brent market 
How does the bookout mechanism work? To illustrate this, it is best to look at the historical growth of the Brent market. 
The original position of the British National Oil Corporation 
(BNOC) established in 1975 as a state oil company with produc-tion interests and subsequently a pricing role, the desire of pro-ducing oil companies to reduce North Sea tax exposure – the concept of tax spinning – and the eventual free market pricing of Brent Blend crude have all led to the development of the Brent forward or 15-day market. 
At times the chains of players involved 
in a single cargo have approached 50 or even 100. The need to make the market efﬁcient and reduce the number of parties even-tually involved in physical loadings led to the evolution of the bookout. 
The mechanism of the Brent 15-day market requires that 
cargoes are nominated by the seller 15 days prior to the ﬁrst of the laydays (a 3-day loading window) which appear in the loading programme for the month. The fact that there were 60 physical cargoes and initially some 400–600 transactions per month meant that the date nomination procedure, which is often carried out on the last possible day and which must by deﬁnition be com-pleted by 17:00 London time on that day, had to be as efﬁcient as possible. 
In the early 1980s chains of transaction began to be appar-
ent after the dates had been declared. So for example, for a par-ticular cargo, an observer being a member of the “club” involved in Brent trading, could write down, after nomination of the date range in accordance with the conditions of sale, a series of trans-actions thus: 
Let us suppose that Company X – an equity producer – has 
a deﬁned date range for sale of a cargo (500,000 barrels ±
10%). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.3/page 1

--- Page 584/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
If the cargo is declared down a chain then the result will be 
as follows: 
X sold to Alpha Alpha sold to Beta Beta sold to Gamma Gamma sold to Delta Delta sold to Alpha Alpha sold to Z (a reﬁner who wishes to lift the cargo) 
Thus between X and Z, all transactions are of a paper nature with no interest in the physical item. 
The actual timing of the bilateral sales transactions between 
the parties would have been irrelevant. 
The ﬁrst bookouts were thus carried out after chains had 
been identiﬁed. It was however realised almost immediately that players did not have to wait for chain nomination before com-pleting a bookout. Indeed to improve the efﬁciency of the nomi-nation procedure it was desirable to eliminate as many players prior to nomination as possible. 12.3.2 Executing a bookout 
Let us therefore assume that this is the case and April 15-day Brent transactions have been identiﬁed between the parties. It is not necessary for the parties to know the price terms of other members of the bookout. 
However, in order for us to appreciate the mechanism we will 
assume pricing as follows: 
Alpha sold to Beta at $18.50 
Beta sold to Gamma at $19.25 
Gamma sold to Delta at $19.00 
Delta sold to Alpha at $20.35 
These parties can now execute a bookout. They will deﬁne a “base price” as probably being $18.50 – although this is irrelevant to the outcome as we shall see, and 
Alpha has agreed to co-ordinate 
the bookout. 
The procedure of a bookout involves the cancellation of the 
original agreements in exchange for a fee settlement between the members of the ring. 
Suppose on 15 March, the four companies have verbally 
agreed to carry out a bookout – remember 
, no nomination of a 
cargo (wetting) has taken place to create the chain yet. They have 
12.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 585/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
agreed that the base price will be $18.50. For an example of the telex issued by Alpha, see Appendix 12.2. 
Note that in the telex the parties propose to settle some 51 
days prior to the normal assumed payment date – deemed to be 30 days after the middle of the contract month (assumed to be the 15th day of the month) and a discounting mechanism is proposed. 
Looking at the money ﬂows before discounting: 
Case A The parties agreed the base price to be $18.50 : 
Beta pays Alpha 500,000 ¥(18.50 -18.50) =$0 
Gamma pays Beta 500,000 ¥(19.25 -18.50) =$375,000 
Delta pays Gamma 500,000 ¥(19.00 -18.50) =$250,000 
Alpha pays Delta 500,000 ¥(20.35 -18.50) =$925,000 
Net result Alpha loss $925,000 
Beta proﬁt $375,000 
Gamma loss $125,000 
Delta proﬁt $675,000 
Case B If the parties had agreed that the base price should be $19.00 : 
Beta pays Alpha 500,000 ¥(18.50 -19.00) =-$250,000 
– in other words Alpha pays Beta $250,000 
Gamma pays Beta 
500,000 ¥(19.25 -19.00) =$125,000 
Delta pays Gamma 500,000 ¥(19.00 -19.00) =$0 
Alpha pays Delta 500,000 ¥(20.35 -19.00) =$675,000 
Net result Alpha loss 
 $925,000 
Beta proﬁt $375,000 
Gamma loss $125,000 
Delta proﬁt $675,000 
In other words, the base price is not relevant to the outcome. It may be selected – as in Case 
A – as being the lowest of the prices 
and the money ﬂows will be all from buyer to seller; or be chosen as in Case B where the size of the money ﬂows is lower, but in one case, seller pays buyer. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.3/page 3

--- Page 586/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
12.3.3 Discounting for advanced payment 
The procedure also allows for advanced payment – in this case 51 days. The accepted calculation for this is as follows: 
DISCOUNTED FEE = ORIGINAL FE E 
100¥ ( 100 + LIBOR ¥ n 360) 
where n is the number of days payment is advanced 
For example, A cargo of April Brent will be deemed to load 15 April. Normal terms would stipulate payment within 30 days. If the bookout settlement is to take place on 25 March then the advancement is 51 days. If LIBOR is 3.5%, then in our example in Case 
A above 
Gamma will pay Beta: 
100DISCOUNTED FEE = 375 000 ¥ , ( 100 + 3.5 ¥ 51 360 ) 
= $373 149 80 on or before 25 March , . 
The other payments made by the parties will also be adjusted accordingly
. 
Following the Brent market hiccups in 1986 and the UK 
Financial Services 
Act of 1988, attempts were made to incor-
porate a clause making the bookout mandatory where iden-tiﬁed. This was eventually dropped and indeed turned around to include a clause allowing a party to decline a bookout without reason. 12.3.4 Reasons for bookingout 
Financial Reduction in the size of the transaction transfers by an order of magnitude – in other words sums normally of the order of up to $1 million as opposed to say $10 million per sale. Early settlement of position Where a Letter of Credit is required – avoidance of any problems such as delay or non-performance. 
12.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 587/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
Declaration procedures Avoidance of problems encountered in 15-day declaration – such as “5 o’clocking”. If a company receives a nomination at just before 5 o’clock on the last possible day
, it does not have sufﬁ-
cient time to pass the nomination on to its buyer. Oil production Avoidance of risk of crude oil production interruption, resulting in a deferred or cancelled programme and hence deferment of settlement. Shipment Avoidance of: delayed vessel nomination 
unacceptable vessel presentation vessel problem alongside 
12.3.5 Reasons for not bookingout 
Trading losses Deferring settlement of a losing position’s negative cash ﬂow. Use of loading tolerance to reduce loss or increase gain Assuming tolerance will be taken by end-receiver which will reduce loss or maximise proﬁt. 
For example, a trader has a purchase at $19 and a sale at 
$18/barrel. In a falling market it may be assumed that the end receiver may aim to lift 500,000 barrels less 5% tolerance, in other words as close as possible to 475,000 barrels. Thus the trader would beneﬁt by up to $25,000 by avoiding a bookout. Trading opportunities Taking the 15-day declaration as a physical, selling it as dated and going short the 15-day
. Here a trader will take such a posi-
tion when on a substantial loss even at the risk of opening up a premium on the 15-day market. Good examples of this occurred during the 1990/91 Gulf crisis. 
For example, a trader has purchased at $29 and sold at 
$19/barrel. The market for 
April dated is now $19.00 with 15-day 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.3/page 5

--- Page 588/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Brent (April) at $19.10. It is now 4 April and the trader receives 
a nomination for a 15-day for 19–21 April loading. 
Case A Take bookout: loss $5 million Case B 
(i) Hang in chain; take 15-day declaration as physical; 
charter and sell CFR or sell as dated but with volume 475,000 barrels 
(ii) Buy in 15-day to meet short position created by (i) loss range on (i) $4.75 million loss range on (ii) $0.0475 -$0.0525 million 
total loss/barrel $4.7975 -$4.8025 million 
net saving about $200,000 
So far we have considered the Brent 15-day 500,000 barrel con-tract in our example of paper markets. During 1986, in response to traders wishes to play in smaller volumes than the 500,000 barrel lot, the concept of mini- or partial-Brent was launched whereby players were able to trade in 50,000 barrel lots. Origi-nally this was linked to an over-the-counter hedging concept whereby players buying 500,000 barrel lots would be able to price in tranches of 50,000 barrels by predetermined trigger dates. T
rade in this vehicle diminished with the launch of the success-
ful Brent futures contract (1,000 barrel lot) in June 1988 but saw a resurgence in the 1990s. 12.3.6 Other forward markets 
Although many forward markets have now been replaced by derivative trading instruments such as swaps (see Chapter 7), a small number still survive. The most important of these are for W
est Texas Intermediate (WTI), Dubai and Tapis crudes: 
•	WTI is based on delivery into Arco/Texaco pipeline at Cushing Oklahoma – in practice on 20,000 to 100,000 
bbl lot sizes. The last quoted day in Platts is 
25th of the month prior to delivery month. Other sweet crudes may be substitutable with premium or discount, 
•	Dubai is based on 500,000 bbl cargoes +
 /-5% FOB 
Fateh terminal. Physical production has diminished over the last few years to 12–15 cargoes per month 
12.3/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 589/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
calling into question its validity as a major price determinant for Arabian Gulf crudes going East. Paper trades are of the order of 5–10 per day, 
•	Tapis is based on 600,000 bbl +
 /-5% cargoes FOB 
Kerteh. Physical volume is about 14–16 cargoes per month. Paper trades are about 5 per day. 
In all of the above forward markets the nomination and declara-tion procedures differ from Brent. 
Outright trades in all crude forward markets probably form 
less than one third of all paper trades done. Grade and time spreads are the most common use of these markets nowadays. 
Forward markets do exist in products but these have tended 
to be used in the form of swaps over recent years since the forward market declaration mechanisms can, as we have seen, lead to uncertainties. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.3/page 7

--- Page 590/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 591/964 ---
12.4 Nomination and 
documentation 
After a deal has been agreed or a lifting date conﬁrmed the shipper will have to provide a vessel nomination to the seller and possibly loading co-ordinator – if necessary through a chain as far as the ﬁrst FOB seller who may be the party at ﬁrst interface with the loading terminal. 12.4.1 Standard documentation 
Large companies have standard documentation schedules which may have coded letters to denote particularly types of informa-tion. Typically the following will be required: 
•	Vessel name or TBN (to be nominated) 
•	Date range of lifting (laydays) 
•	Cargo reference number if applicable 
•	ETA of vessel 
•	Quantity/quality of cargo to be lifted – this may include a tolerance, a minimum, a maximum or a target; or in some cases an exact ﬁgure if the nomination is part of a cargo that can be separately documented. 
•	Instructions on the taking of samples 
•	Instructions as to which independent inspector is appointed 
•	Advice on agent appointed (where relevant) 
•	Name of supplier/consignor 
•	Name of consignee to applied to bill of lading (B/L) together with any special instructions on B/L 
•	List of documents to be supplied and these may include for example: 
•	Bills of lading (usually in triplicate) 
•	Quantity/quality certiﬁcates 
•	Origin/authenticity certiﬁcates 
•	Cargo manifest 
•	Vessel time sheets and ullage reports 
•	Master’s receipt for documents 
•	Master’s receipt for samples 
•	Finally the names of parties to whom the documents 
are to be distributed 
It is quite possible that the B/L may be made out (consigned) to the seller himself, and in any event there may be a long chain 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.4/page 1

--- Page 592/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
between sellers and buyers. The original B/L will be despatched 
to the named consignee. In the event that this consignee named on the B/L is not the last buyer, he will have to “endorse” the B/L to his buyer – literally stamp on the B/L: “Endorsed to BUYERCO by SELLERCO signed . . .” before sending them on to the buyer. 
12.4.2 Letter of indemnity 
In many cases, buyers may not receive the B/L (and hence evi-dence of title) in time for payment and in such cases they or their bank could refuse payment for the goods. In such cases the seller issues to buyer a Letter of Indemnity (in wording acceptable to buyer) to accompany the commercial invoice and thus release payment. (See Chapter 13 for an example of a Seller
’s Letter of 
Indemnity (LOI)). At such times as the B/L is endorsed and received in good order by buyer, the LOI will be cancelled. 12.4.3 Letter of credit 
The job of credit department or treasury may be to control whether a buyer has to supply some form of payment guarantee. This may be in the form of a Parent Company Guarantee – a device which may be used when dealing with a wholly owned sub-sidiary of a parent company with which open credit would nor-mally exist; provision of an Irrevocable Documentary Letter of Credit (L/C) or provision of a Standby Letter of Credit (Standby L/C) which may be invoked on the buyer
’s bank in the event that 
the buyer does not directly meet payment as speciﬁed. (See Chapter 13 for examples of these.) 
Although aspects of these forms of guarantee of performance 
and or payment are covered elsewhere in this Manual, it often falls to the operations desk to chase up the associated documen-tation. Attention must be paid to detail in dealing with Letters of Credit as minor errors may cause invalidation. 
Although a contract (FOB, CFR or CIF) may specify that the 
Letter of Credit (L/C) may have to be in place say 10 days prior to loading and failure may imply repudiation, deals are usually kept going and, by continuing to exert pressure on the buyer to comply with the contract, the documentation is usually provided. This may well be at the last minute when the vessel is being held up awaiting conﬁrmation of an L/C. Lately
, the Standby L/C has 
been more favoured by sellers because of its ﬂexibility. Note in the case of a sale delivered ex-ship (DES), the L/C timing require-ments may relate to discharge. 
12.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 593/964 ---
12.5 Inspection 
The independent inspector has been likened to a ﬁeld represen-tative, investigator and policeman reporter and analyst. He may be appointed to attend a vessel at loading or discharge, or a ter-minal interfacing with ship, pipeline or reﬁnery. The role the independent inspector has to play will depend on the instructions and involvement of the client in the shipment. 
In attending a loading at a crude terminal where the client 
is an fob seller
, the instructions may simply refer to attendance 
to ascertain quantity/quality loaded is as per instructions to ter-minal and vessel, and matches documentation produced. It may be a condition of the contract that inspection is either shared between buyer and seller or paid for by the party requesting it. 
A more complete set of instructions for inspection for a 
buyer/shipper in the case of a product loading is given in Appendix 12.1. 
The role of the inspector is truly to be independent so it is 
worth establishing that the inspector so appointed has a record of providing a quality service. Most occasions the work of the inspector will provide back-up to other information. On the odd occasion – when there is an operational problem or in more extreme cases a dispute leading to litigation – the inspector will provide useful input. 
In cases of cargo loss – determined by comparing the origi-
nal B/L ﬁgures (i.e. usually shore tank measurements or metered quantity at the supply end) with the out-turn (the amount deliv-ered to the receiver and usually measured in shore tank at the discharge) – the inspector
’s report will be valuable in ascertain-
ing the role played by the ship. 
It is critical that all parties – ship, shore, buyer, seller – are 
aware of the inspector
’s role. Simply put, an inspector’s role is 
EITHER to act as witness to the quantity/quality determinations made by vessel and shore OR to actually determine quantity and quality himself. It is worth noting that the sales contracts of some major oil companies call for the inspector to be a witness in the cases of transactions at any terminal owned by that company with the Q/Q determination being carried out by the terminal, whereas if the company is buying or selling at a third party ter-minal they will request determination by the inspector. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.5/page 1

--- Page 594/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 595/964 ---
12.6 Demurrage 
Demurrage – charge for excess laytime incurred in loading or dis-charging a vessel – is a specialised subject and often assigned to a specialist. Operations will encounter demurrage as they may be the ﬁrst company staff to see a vessel time sheet or sailing telex. 
There are essentially two forms of demurrage: 1.	Supply or contract demurrage : that associated with 
an oil sales contract or terminalling arrangement where a supplier or receiver of the cargo (or termi-nalling company as the case may be) has a duty to turn the vessel loading or discharging around within the speciﬁed laytime – typically 36 hours for a straightforward crude oil shipment. This may be related to the charter party demurrage rate ( see 
below ), or a rate to be determined by an accepted 
source – for example the London T
anker Brokers 
Panel, or a published rate such as AFRA. AFRA – Average Freight Rate Assessment – is published monthly by the AFRA panel and lists rates in World-scale terms applicable to key tanker sizes. Access to AFRA rates is by subscription. 
2.	Charter party (
 CP) demurrage – that associated with 
the Charter party as speciﬁed between owner and charterer and typically 72 hours for the voyage. The exact terms (rate) will be speciﬁed in the CP. 
There are occasions where the shipper may proﬁt from demur-rage. Take for example the case where the vessel takes 48 hours laytime at load port resulting from delays caused by the shore supplier but only 24 hours at discharge port. If 36 hours is allowed under a supply contract, the shipper may be able to claim 12 hours demurrage from the supplier but not be liable to any CP 
demurrage. In some cases, suppliers may insert 
a clause effectively limiting their liability to a portion of any CP demurrage incurred. Some suppliers do not pay demurrage at all! 
Operations staff should be aware of the following. Many 
Charter party Demurrage clauses contain a time-bar – usually 60 or 90 days. In other words, a claim has to be launched in writing within a certain time of the event taking place. 
Also more 
companies are incorporating clauses deﬁning payment of 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.6/page 1

--- Page 596/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
demurrage within a speciﬁed time after receipt of invoice and doc -
umentation. In the past this tended to be an area which was for -
gotten about and substantial sums can accrue. Demurrage claims are still overlooked, sometimes put at the bottom of the paper pile; but this can be an expensive practice. 
12.6/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 597/964 ---
12.7 Shipping operations 
12.7.1 Risks and opportunities 
In today’s trading environment, even the simple purchase of a cargo of crude oil can generate a wide variety of options for the operations co-ordinator
. For example, a West African cargo has 
been purchased fob. The objective is to trade it to the US Gulf. A company controlled vessel is ballasting to West Africa, which looks as though it could meet the scheduled lifting date range. 
The crude price risk management aspects – hedging the pur-
chase on Brent, covering the dated/forward risk with a contract for difference swap ( see Chapter 7 ), hedging the WTI-based sale 
price – could all be put in place at the time of the deal or any time thereafter
. But the physical transport of the cargo to the US 
offers both risks and opportunities. 
In the 1970s, the pattern would have been predetermined by 
supplier and receiver planning. Now the combinations could be as follows, the selection of ﬁnal delivery mode will depend on several factors and objectives: 
•	Sell the cargo fob; charter out the company vessel on the market. 
If sufﬁcient proﬁt (which may be hedged) can be made between the initial purchase and fob sale, then no further involvement may be considered useful. Shipping involvement may not be seen as an advantage in this particular deal. 
•	Sell the cargo fob and charter out the company vessel to the buyer of the cargo. 
A variation of the ﬁrst case, again leaving the buyer with ship-ping responsibility. 
•	Load the cargo on the company vessel and sell CFR, CIF or DES. 
A shipping involvement may appear to offer greater proﬁt poten-tial. Continued control up to the point of sale in the right kind of market may be beneﬁcial. There may be an opportunity to proﬁt from freight – for example by using a larger vessel than typical for the route and on which the landed market value of the oil is generally assessed. The company may wish to raise its proﬁle as 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.7/page 1

--- Page 598/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
a seller of oil with delivery capability . The decision to go for CFR, 
CIF or DES then depends on the level of risk the company feels it wishes to take on versus additional proﬁt potential, DES of course giving most risk on B/L versus out-turn volume. 
•	Charter in a vessel to load the cargo and sell CFR, CIF, DES; charter out the company vessel on the market. 
There may be an opportunity to proﬁt from the cargo size available for loading and add proﬁt by loading on another vessel. 
Nowadays many smaller trading companies combine oil and 
shipping operations; to some extent it is still fragmented in the majors for management reasons, but anyone who has worked in a small trading ofﬁce will have recognised the value of combined operations. Knowledge of shipping movements provides useful intelligence on deals done and other companies’ 
supply patterns. 
Additionally it should be noted that some companies specialise in providing a tanker tracking service. 
12.7.2 Single voyage 
Having liaised with chartering personnel to arrange a spot ﬁxture, operations will have to talk to brokers/owners on the post ﬁxture operations side, together with agents and terminal per-sonnel. Voyage orders to chartered vessels will be sent via brokers through to owners and vessel. 
Although owners pay for agency 
in voyage charter, agents may, depending on the terms of the Charter party (CP), be appointed by charterer. In any event, the charterer may wish to appoint his own “protective” agents as in fact occurs occasionally with some fob sales on cargoes where there are a number of interests. 
The signiﬁcance of vessel ETAs (Expected Time of Arrival) 
in relation to a single voyage charter cannot be overstressed. If the vessel is, or is anticipated to be, arriving after laydays and thus, presumably
, after the FOB purchase lifting window, this 
situation could create a breach of contract for the charterer as oil buyer. The charterer is then faced with several options to remedy the situation: 
•	get agreement from seller to defer the lifting window; 
•	ﬁnd an alternative potential buyer with a vessel and carry out an exchange; or 
•	charter an alternative vessel to meet the lifting window – if possible. 
12.7/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 599/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
Recovery from the tanker owner of any damages on the oil trading side is only likely if the vessel had misled the charterer over the ETA or was aware of circumstances that would alter the ETA and did not disclose them. 
Consider also the implications for any hedging programme, 
which might as a result of delay on voyage require a rollover of a hedging month with consequent transaction costs or increase in basis risk. 
Again it is unlikely that the charterer will be able 
to recover these, provided that delay was outside the owner’s control and ETAs were advised in accordance with the CP. 12.7.3 Time charter 
Orders to time chartered vessels will be sent direct to the vessel and copied to the owners. The operator handling the time char-tered vessel needs to ensure that agents are appointed and instructed for each port. From time to time, owners may prefer to appoint (and pay for) their own agents at a port to handle matters for owners’ 
purposes such as crew change. 
The agent will also be a source of up-to-date information on 
port conditions ranging from berth and harbour physicals dimen-sions to outlook for delay and port costs and requirements or restrictions. 
The operator of a time charter vessel will be paying atten-
tion to services required by the vessel in addition to other cargo aspects – such as ballast facilities and bunkers. 
Although not 
directly responsible for owners and vessel needs, it is in his inter-est – as it may save problems and time later – to be aware of the supplies of stores and water and whether or not repair facilities are available or whether repairs can be carried out alongside. 
All orders should include consignor and supplier, grade and 
quantity of cargo in compliance within Charter party (CP) terms, outward destination (port or area), name of consignee and receiver at discharge port (if known). The operations personnel will have to consider restrictions that may cause dead freight at load port (such as draft or cubic capacity of vessel), on passage (such as canals), and at discharge port, and evaluate whether these can be overcome most economically by
, for example, ligh-
tering or short-loading. Care must be taken on routing if orders are to be changed (within CP 
terms) to ensure that the vessel is 
able to enter a different loadline zone with the cargo on board. 
Operations personnel may also be required to keep an eye 
on a vessel’
s voyage performance as part of the ongoing per-
formance audit process and with a view to inputting to a company database on tankers for future reference in chartering activity
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.7/page 3

--- Page 600/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Such voyage performance will include the ability of the 
owner to react to the charterer’s instruction without delay as well as Charter party performance aspects such as the speed and con
-
sumption of the vessel and discharging capability, which in the case of a time chartered vessel are essential in reviewing CP 
per-
formance against description. 
In the event that a vessel on voyage charter arrives at the 
discharge port and documents are not available, as frequently is the case in these days of chains, the master/owner will require a letter of indemnity – part of an example of which is given in Appendix 12.3. The wording is usually incorporated into the Charter party
. 
At this stage the LOI wording may incorporate a clause 
requiring the LOI to be issued by a ﬁrst class bank (on behalf of the charterer) which is acceptable to the owner
. 
Delay in presentation of a B/L or LOI will be for the char-
terer
’s account. 
12.7.4 Vessel arbitrage 
Vessel arbitrage can take the form of improving timing or size with consequent freight savings. 
In the case of the timing arbitrage, the player will 
re-let (charter 
-out) on the expectation that the rate he will obtain 
will be the same (perhaps improving his delay situation) or greater than that obtained for a similar vessel at the subsequent charter-in. 
For example, a cargo has to be loaded 17–19 November. A 
company vessel shows an ET
A at the load port of 14 November. 
If the vessel can be chartered out at Worldscale 70 for loading on 14 November and another vessel chartered in at Worldscale 70 for loading 17 November then 3 days delay will be saved. 
The size arbitrage plays on the nominalization aspect of 
chartering can be seen in regionally established markets. 
For example, if a 125,000 tonner (a vessel with cargo carry-
ing capacity of 125,000 tonnes) will charter or trade (in the freight sense) at W
orldscale 65, then a 130,000 tonner will be 
likely to trade at Worldscale 62.5. 
In other words, tonnage multiplied by freight is a constant 
within reasonable bounds – in a given trade route and within a similar size and type category of vessel. 
Thus all things being equal, if you have a 125,000 tonner 
and it ﬁts a cargo, charter it out and replace it with a 130,000 tonner charter 
-in, then try to ﬁll out the cargo, which may be 
available anyway on the purchase tolerance. 
12.7/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 601/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
Of course there are other dimensional implications: does the 
vessel ﬁt the discharge port? Will additional lightering be required – if so at what cost? 12.7.5 Alternatives on discharge 
A player has loaded a cargo of Arabian crude for the West. Leaving aside cargo pricing ramiﬁcations he has decided to deliver to the US Gulf. The options could be as follows: 
•	Discharge at LOOP for on-shipment by pipeline assuming capacity through LOOP 
is available. 
At around Worldscale 60 in 2001 terms the freight would work out at around $1.70/barrel. However
, to this has to be added the 
cost of distribution through LOOP which would of course depend on destination and for local US Gulf area this could be $0.30–$0.60/barrel. 
•	Lighter in the US Gulf. 
In 2001 terms, and assuming the lightering was a 12 day exer-cise, total delivery cost would approach $2.10/barrel. 
•	Hold in ﬂoating storage (vessel) and lighter as appropriate. 
Cost as above plus ﬂoating storage charges, which would be about $0.30–0.50/barrel per month. 
•	Trans-ship across the jetty in the Caribbean to a shuttle ship delivering direct to the reﬁnery on the Gulf Coast. 
Assuming a shuttle cost of Worldscale 150, again at 2001 rates, this would work out at around $2.25/barrel. 
•	Put into storage in the Caribbean and shuttle as appropriate. 
Total delivery costs would approximate to $2.30–2.50/barrel for say 10-day storage and would escalate with the storage period. Storage costs may work out between $0.15 and $0.30/barrel per month. 
A word on the assumptions: there is also a small in-transit 
loss when any lightering or trans-shipment takes place (0.2 per 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.7/page 5

--- Page 602/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
cent based on typical industry averages) which is not included in 
the costs identiﬁed above. The Caribbean has been assumed to cover the area including the lower Netherlands Antilles to the Bahamas. The Bahamas may work out a few cents per barrel more than lightering for US Gulf delivery depending on the rela
-
tionship between VLCC and shuttle freight costs. It is, however, particularly well placed for servicing the US 
Atlantic Coast 
reﬁneries (such as Philadelphia). 
12.7/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 603/964 ---
12.8 Terminals, trans-shipment 
and storage 
12.8.1 Terminals management 
Involvement with terminals covers many aspects – production companies or joint ventures, receiving terminals for crude or products, intra-company storage and trans-shipment terminals and third party storage companies operating their own terminals. W
e have already addressed some aspects of production terminals. 
A person sitting on the operational desk at an oil terminal 
or an oil company managing a terminal or a company wishing to execute terminalling deals requires a general all-round knowl-edge of oil deals, shipping deals and regulations, and of course storage arrangements. 
If not a pure oil storage company, the operator’s company 
may be involved as a principal in the oil arrangement, i.e. have title to the oil at some stage. In any event the terminal opera-tions staff will be liaising directly with terminal technical and safety staff, marine staff, shipping agents, tankers and masters, independent inspectors, oil companies – all at operational level. 
Key problems will be general inventory control, quality/ 
quantity measurement and jetty occupancy
. Back in the design 
days of many terminals – the early 1970s, considerable care went into the estimating of storage and jetty facilities, as the world – as we have said – was ship driven. Tankers turned up at a ter-minal and demanded to be served. Simulation studies were run using models to generate random or near random arrival pat-terns and evaluate them using queuing theory, and the cost of delay in terms of vessel demurrage due to constraints in tankage volume or jetty occupancy and tanker size. 
With high freight rates, a tanker had to be turned around 
as expeditiously as possible and the discharge was continued apace sometimes at the expense of effective stripping of cargo. 
In order to act as an incentive to quick turnaround, many 
terminals included in their conditions berth occupancy clauses, whereby if a tanker exceeded its expected residence time along-side for ship’s reasons such as slow pumping/deballasting, then the terminal would penalise the user
. This also acted as a revenue 
source to pay demurrage. 
As the cargo became more valuable relative to freight and 
Crude Oil W
ashing (COW) became the norm (and indeed to some 
extent mandatory) as opposed to the exception, tankers stayed alongside for a greater period. Excess berth occupancy clauses 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.8/page 1

--- Page 604/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
were still being invoked, although there were additional 
allowances for excess berth occupancy for COW. 
Clearly berth occupancy clauses worked in opposition to the 
general overview of oil economics, pollution control, safety and environmental interest. In the climate prevailing in the mid-1980s when many terminals all but went out of business due to slack demand, these clauses tended to lapse and many have not been reinstated. 12.8.2 Spot storage 
Clauses which should be covered in a spot storage deal are as follows: 
•	Term of storage : number of days tanks are occupied 
from ﬁrst barrel in to last barrel out. 
•	Quantity : maximum volume to be speciﬁed – may be 
gross. 
•	Fees
 : based on barrels capacity taken in storage – 
likely to be the maximum storage used in terms of inte-gral tank sizes – may be net. In the mid-1980s actual volume stored may have been negotiated. 
•	Heating : whether required and if so whether cost is 
included in fees above. 
•	Loss limit : this is an important and often misunder-
stood clause. Some storage companies will specify best endeavours to redeliver all of the stored quantity
. 
Others will guarantee no losses in excess of 0.2 per cent. Others will take the guaranteed loss amount and only redeliver 99.8 per cent regardless. 
•	Storage conditions : whether segregated, commingled 
with some of customer
’s own material or with third 
party material. 
•	Title and risk : usually for the account of the customer . 
Insurance may be taken by the storage company to cover his negligence only. 
•	Measurement : measured in-tank by terminal person-
nel. Independent inspection will usually be for the account of the storage user
. 
•	Payment : invoice may be raised upon commencement. 
Payment may be speciﬁed within 5–30 days. 
•	Applicable law : usually the country of location. 
12.8/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 605/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
12.8.3 Term storage 
Other clauses applicable to term deals are: 
•	Period : monthly or annually; whether evergreen with 
a cancellation clause with suitable notice period. 
•	Quantity : a term deal may offer the user the ﬂexibil-
ity of use of a terminal for storage or trans-shipment depending on the prevailing economics. Usually a deal will be structured on the rights of the user to a deﬁned quantity of tankage either segregated or commingled within quality groups. 
•	Nominations : nomination procedures for vessels and 
off take (shipping or pipeline). 
•	Use of jetty : the deal may assume a speciﬁed number 
of jetty days aside from the tankage aspects. 
•	Fees: may be based on term use – monthly or yearly – 
of a speciﬁed quantity of tankage limited by number of turnovers (or throughput quantity). Incremental volume of tankage capacity or additional throughput may be speciﬁed at different rates. 
12.8.4 Trans-shipment across jetty 
Depending on trafﬁc congestion, many terminals will offer the user the opportunity to trans-ship across the jetty to avoid addi-tional handling losses in and out of tankage, which will attract lower fees than short term spot storage. 
In the case of crude oil, this may also be useful as a replace-
ment for lightering, being possibly more secure, although it may be more or less expensive depending on the overall logistics pattern of the vessels involved and freight rates. Example: Cargo from Persian Gulf to Philadelphia Route a) VLCC trans-ships across jetty at Bahamas into 80,000 tonners for Philadelphia. 
$/bl 
VLCC Mid East Gulf to Bahamas @ W60 1
1.99/7.3 = 1.64 
Shuttle Bahamas to Philadelphia @ W115 = 0.49 
Across jetty fee = 0.08 
Total = 2.21 
Route b) 130,000 tonner moves PG to Philadelphia (via Suez) 130,000 tonner Mid East Gulf to Philadelphia @W100 
= 2.50 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 12.8/page 3

--- Page 606/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
12.8.5 Terminal regulations 
Regardless of the type of deal, the Terminal Regulations will form part of the contract. These will include advice on areas such as: 
•	Pilotage and tugs. 
•	Availability of services: ballast, bunkers, stores, water, repairs etc. 
•	Vessel regulations, safety aspects, pollution control, liabilities. 
•	Nomination, ETA and NOR procedures. 
•	Laytime and demurrage – demurrage may be deﬁned as dependent on parcels loaded, whether or not related to 
AFRA or another freight determination, whether 
limited to the charter party demurrage calculated or charged. 
•	Vessel routing – of increasing importance in a pollu-tion conscious environment. 
12.8.6 General points 
Anyone involved in storage or trans-shipment on a regular or term basis should give consideration to an inspection of the ter-minal in the same way as one would inspect a tanker prior to chartering. 
Areas of particular importance are as follows: 
•	Tanks: number and size, whether or not ﬁtted with 
bottom drain; some companies only provide gross in and out service; if a bottom drain is ﬁtted, free water can be drawn off, roof drain provision given local climate conditions, whether heating and mixers are available. 
•	Deballasting facilities: whether clean ballast has to be 
pumped ashore. 
•	Lines: valve separation, external interfaces and 
metering. 
•	Power supply: whether self-generated or dependent on 
third party
. 
•	Marine facilitie s: ﬁre and pollution control. 
•	Laboratory : range of tests that can be performed, 
whether a truly independent inspection service is available. 
•	Administration: control room facilities, security and 
safety
. 
12.8/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 607/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
12.8.7 Discharge 
Prior to a ship’s arrival at the discharge port, the operators (shipper
, buyer, seller as appropriate) should check the status of 
title documents and execution of any letters of indemnity that may be required and in the case of DES terms possibly any out-standing letter of credit requirements that should be fulﬁlled. 
The vessel will have given ETAs under its charter party 
terms and the operators will have ensured that, with or without lightering as appropriate, the vessel is able to enter the port and proceed to a safe berth as agreed. 
Once at berth the vessel has to discharge cargo, ballast and 
vacate the berth as expeditiously as possible. 
All this must be 
done with the interests of charterer, cargo receiver, cargo owners and ship owner in mind. The cargo owner may be concerned that the vessel strips as much cargo out as possible as he wants to ensure any losses are minimised. The cargo receiver may be con-cerned about contract demurrage liability; he may also have other vessels to service. The charterer may want the vessel turned around as quickly as possible to avoid any Charter party demurrage liability
. 
At this point it is also essential to establish that the vessel 
is aware of port regulations and practices. For example, the prac-tice of crude oil washing may be limited for reasons of berth occu-pancy (in some cases charges may be made for excess berth occupancy) or limitation on loss of light cargoes. 
All parties and 
in particular the vessel must be aware of such practices in advance to prevent interruption that may be otherwise caused by the need for discussion with seller/receiver/buyer/shipper involved during the actual cargo operation. In this respect, whilst initially operators may rely on agents for early advice, the ser-vices of an inspector on the ground at discharge can be useful in ensuring the vessel meets local requirements and will provide valuable feedback to operations personnel for future movements into that port. Of course, in some cases, a company may have its own employees fulﬁlling this role. 
Continuing on the theme of inspection, it is important that 
the samples of material on board the vessel at arrival, in any lines between vessel and tank, and in receiving tanks, are taken prior to discharge. In the case of product shipment this action is critical. 
In the event of multiple port discharging, it is necessary to 
give the vessel advance notice of discharge quantities and grades at each port at the earliest opportunity
. In the case of complex 
Supplement 8 May 2002 12.8/page 5

--- Page 608/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
cargoes such as clean products and lubricants, the appropriate 
time may even be prior to loading. 
In the event that a grade is discharged at 2 or more loca-
tions, depending on contractual arrangements, this may require the reallocation of Bills of Lading. 
For example, a vessel loads 100,000 tonnes net of gasoil for 
discharge, 60,000 tonnes to a consignee at port 
A and 40,000 
tonnes to a consignee at port B. Assume port A receives 60,500 tonnes based on out-turn and port B receives 39,300 tonnes based on out-turn. A total of 99,800 has been discharged yet on the face of it, A has made a 0.8 per cent gain and B a 1.8 per cent loss. 
Clearly there has been an overall loss which should be borne 
equally
. Reallocated bills of lading would pro rata this and show 
100,000 tonnes loaded basis 60,621 tonnes for port A and 39,379 tonnes for port B. Thus this way A and B will both have experi-enced a 0.2 per cent loss on out-turn – a more equitable solution. 
Finally, having completed discharge, the cargo owners and 
spot charterer will have no further interest in the vessel, save that regarding any claims follow up on cargo quantity/quality loss or demurrage. The vessel owner or time charterer will be looking to expedite port departure, as time without cargo means time without freight earnings. 
12.8/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 609/964 ---
Appendix 12.1 Instruction to 
inspectors 
WE APPOINT XYZ SERVICES AS INDEPENDENT INSPEC-
TORS AT ........... TO WITNESS LOADPORT DETERMINA-TION AS FOLLOWS: 
VESSEL NAME LOAD PORT/BERTH/SUPPLIER PRODUCTS DESCRIPTION, QUANTITIES 
AND QUALITIES 
ETA AGENT VESSEL DWT AND OTHER RELEVANT PHYSICAL 
INFORMATION 
FLAG THE LOADING INSTRUCTIONS TO THE VESSEL 
HAVE 
BEEN GIVEN AS FOLLOWS: 
E.G. LOAD PRODUCT A INTO VESSEL SEGREGATION OF 
C
A P A C I T Y...L O A D  P R ODUCT B INTO VESSEL SEGRE-
GATION OF CAPACITY ...E T C . 
WE REQUEST BUNKER SAMPLES AND BUNKER GAUGING 
OF 
ALL BUNKER TANKS ON ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE. 
SAMPLES TO BE RETAINED UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE. 
THE FOLLOWING TESTS ARE TO BE PERFORMED ON 
EACH PRODUCT
: 
[LIST OF TESTS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFICATION OF 
PRODUCTS] 
TANKS AND SHORE LINES TO BE TESTED AND SAMPLES 
TO BE RET
AINED ON BOARD. 
VESSEL TANKS AND LINES TO BE CHECKED BEFORE 
LOADING TO 
AVOID ANY POSSIBLE CONTAMINATION. 
CHECK BOTTOMS ON VESSEL BEFORE LOADING. 
SAMPLES TO BE T
AKEN AND RETAINED. ISSUE SUIT-
ABILITY CERTIFICATE AS REQUIRED. 
PUMPING RATE FROM THE TERMINAL TO BE MAIN-
TAINED AT ALL TIMES IN ACCORDANCE WITH VESSEL’S 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 12.1/page 1

--- Page 610/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
CAPACITY TO RECEIVE. IF RATE DROPS AT ANY TIME, 
ISSUE A LETTER OF PROTEST. 
REPORT CARGO TEMPERATURE IN SHORE TANKS AND 
VESSEL TANKS. VESSEL EXPERIENCE FACTOR TO BE APPLIED. PROTEST TO BE ISSUED IF DIFFERENCES EXCEED 2/10 OF 1 PER CENT BETWEEN B/L AND VESSEL’S ULLAGES. 
COMPOSITE SAMPLE TO BE TAKEN FROM VESSEL AND 
RET
AINED ASHORE WITH ...( O R  F O R W A R D E D  T O...) . 
PLEASE PROVIDE A SAILING TELEX COVERING B/L AND 
QUANTITY/QUALITY FIGURES, TIME 
ALL FAST, COM-
MENCEMENT, COMPLETION OF LOADING, HOSE DIS-CONNECTION AND SAILING TIMES. 
NOTIFY US IMMEDIATELY IN EVENT ANY PROBLEMS 
ARISE. FULL 
INSPECTOR’S WRITTEN REPORTS TO BE 
SENT TO US AS SOON AS THEY ARE COMPLETED. 
Appendix 12.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 611/964 ---
Appendix 12.2 Sample Brent 
bookout telex 
TELEX DATED 15 MARCH 2001 FROM: ALPHA TRADING COMPANY PLC, ANDREW ASH TO: BETA TRADING A/S, ATTENTION BJORN BLAND COPY TO: GAMMA TRADING CORP., ATTENTION GRETA 
GROLSCH 
COPY TO: DELTA TRADING LTD, ATTENTION DAVID 
DUNNIT 
RE: BOOKOUT OF APRIL BRENT, ALPHA BOOKOUT 
NUMBER ABC123 
IT HAS COME TO OUR ATTENTION THAT THE FOLLOWING 
SEQUENCE OF 
AGREEMENTS EXISTS FOR A CARGO OF 
BRENT SYSTEM CRUDE OIL WHICH IS TO BE DELIV-ERED IN APRIL 2001. 
ALPHA TRADING PROPOSES THE FOLLOWING CANCEL-
LATION AGREEMENTS FORMAT IN ORDER TO FACILI-TATE THE HANDLING OF THESE AGREEMENTS. THE LANGUAGE OF THE CANCELLA
TION IS AS FOLLOWS: 
QUOTE THIS AGREEMENT IS EXECUTED ON 15 MARCH 2001 BY 
AND AMONG 
ALPHA TRADING COMPANY PLC ‘ALPHA’ AND BETA TRADING A/S ‘BET
 A’ 
AND GAMMA TRADING CORP ‘GAMMA’ AND DELTA TRADING LTD ‘DEL
 TA’ 
WHEREAS ALPHA AND BETA ARE PARTIES TO A CON -
TRACT IN WHICH ALPHA HAS AGREED TO SELL AND BET
A HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE: 
VOLUME CRUDE TYPE DELIVERY DATE 500,000 BBLS BRENT APRIL 
 2001 
WHEREAS BETA AND GAMMA ARE PARTIES TO A CON-
TRACT IN WHICH BETA HAS AGREED TO SELL AND GAMMA 
HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE: 
VOLUME CRUDE TYPE DELIVERY DATE 500,000 BBLS BRENT APRIL 
 2001 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 12.2/page 1

--- Page 612/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
WHEREAS GAMMA AND DELTA ARE PARTIES TO A CON -
TRACT IN WHICH GAMMA HAS AGREED TO SELL AND DEL
TA HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE: 
VOLUME CRUDE TYPE DELIVERY DATE 500,000 BBLS BRENT APRIL 
 2001 
WHEREAS DELTA AND ALPHA ARE PARTIES TO A CON -
TRACT IN WHICH DELTA HAS AGREED TO SELL AND ALPHA 
HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE: 
VOLUME CRUDE TYPE DELIVERY DATE 500,000 BBLS BRENT APRIL 
 2001 
THE ABOVE PARTIES HAVE CONCLUDED THAT IT WOULD 
BE IN THEIR JOINT INTEREST TO TERMINA
TE THE 
CONTRACTS IDENTIFIED ABOVE. NOW THEREFORE IT IS HEREBY AGREED AS FOLLOWS: 
1.
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE EXECUTION OF THIS AGREE
 -
MENT TO CANCEL THE CONTRACTS ABOVE, THE ENTER
 -
ING INTO THIS AGREEMENT TO PAY THE CANCELLATION
FEE 
AS SET FORTH BELOW, EACH PARTY EXPRESSLY
RELEASES THE OTHER PARTY AND THEIR SUCCESSORS,
ASSIGNS AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALL LIA
 -
BILITIES, CLAIMS AND DEMANDS ARISING OUT OF THE
CONTRACTS 
IDENTIFIED ABOVE, AND ALL OF THE ABOVE
REFERENCED CONTRACTS ARE HEREBY RESCINDED,
TERMINATED AND CANCELLED IMMEDIATELY.
2.
THAT IN ORDER TO CALCULATE THE CANCELLATION FEE
P
AYABLE BY EACH PARTY HERETO A BASE PRICE OF USD
18.50 PER BBL ‘THE BASE PRICE’ SHALL BE USED.
3.
EACH PARTY HERETO SHALL PAY ITS SELLER A CANCEL
 -
LATION FEE EQUAL TO 500,000 MULTIPLIED BY THE
AMOUNT
, IF ANY, BY WHICH SUCH PARTY’S PURCHASE
PRICE PER BBL EXCEEDS THE BASE PRICE PROVIDED
ALWAYS THAT IF THE PURCHASE PRICE IS LESS THAN
THE BASE PRICE, THAT PARTY SHALL RECEIVE FROM 
ITS SUPPLIER A CANCELLATION FEE EQUAL TO 500,000
MULTIPLIED BY THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO
PRICES. THE DEEMED BILL OF LADING DATE SHALL BE
15 APRIL 2001, CANCELLATION FEE SHALL BE PAID IN U.S.
DOLLARS IN IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE FUNDS ON OR
BEFORE 25 MARCH 2001 DOLLARS DISCOUNTED AT A
Appendix 12.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 613/964 ---
12 Operations and logistics
RATE OF 3.5000 PER CENT (LIBOR) PER ANNUM INTEREST FOR 51 DAYS. 4.
ALL PAYMENTS HEREUNDER SHALL BE MADE IN FULL
WITHOUT SET
-OFF DEDUCTION OR COUNTERCLAIM.
5.
THIS CANCELLATION AGREEMENT SHALL BE CONSID
 -
ERED AND INTERPRETED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
LA
WS OF ENGLAND AND SHALL CONSTITUTE THE
ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES AND
SUBJECT TO JURISDICTION OF ENGLISH COURTS
WITHOUT RECOURSE TO ARBITRATION.
6.
THE SIGNATORIES HERETO HEREBY WARRANT AND REP
 -
RESENT THAT THEY ARE AUTHORISED AND EMPOWERED
BY THEIR COMP
ANY TO CONSENT TO THIS AGREEMENT.
7.
EACH PARTY HERETO EXPRESSLY WARRANTS AND REP
 -
RESENTS THAT THE DETAILS OF THOSE CONTRACTS TO
WHICH IT IS 
A PARTY AS REFERRED TO IN THE ABOVE
RECITALS ARE CORRECT AND ACCURATE IN ALL
RESPECTS AND HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE
OTHER PARTIES HERETO WHICH ARE NOT A PARTY TO
SUCH CONTRACTS ARE ACTING ON RELIANCE OF THE
ABOVE WARRANTY AND REPRESENTATION.
8.
THIS AGREEMENT SHALL COME INTO EFFECT WHEN
ALPHA 
HAS GIVEN TELEX NOTICE TO ALL OTHER
PARTIES TO THIS AGREEMENT, STATING THAT ALPHA
HAS RECEIVED THE TELEX AGREEMENT OF SUCH
PARTIES TO THE TERMS OF THIS AGREEMENT.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF THIS AGREEMENT HAS BEEN
ENTERED INTO THE DA
Y AND YEAR FIRST WRITTEN
ABOVE.
ALPHA TRADING COMPANY PLC
BY
: .....................
BETA TRADING A/S
BY: .....................
GAMMA TRADING CORP
BY: .....................
DELTA TRADING LTD
BY: .....................
UNQUOTE
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 12.2/page 3

--- Page 614/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
THE FOLLOWING TELEX SHOULD BE SENT TO ALPHA 
TRADING COMPANY PLC (LONDON OFFICE) AND ALL OTHER PARTIES. 
QUOTE REFERENCE NUMBER: ABC123 
WE REFER TO THE CANCELLATION AGREEMENT DATED [INSERT DATE OF THIS TELEX] BY AND AMONG ALPHA TRADING COMPANY PLC ‘ALPHA’ AND BETA TRADING A/S ‘BETA’ 
AND GAMMA TRADING CORP ‘GAMMA’ AND DELTA TRADING LTD ‘DELTA’ 
BY THIS TELEX WE, [INSERT COMPANY NAME] CONFIRM OUR 
AGREEMENT TO THE TERMS OF THIS SAID CAN-
CELLATION AGREEMENT AND FURTHER CONFIRM THAT WE HA
VE CALCULATED AND AGREED WITH OUR SELLER 
THE DISCOUNTED CANCELLATION TO BE PAID PUR-SUANT TO CLAUSE 3 ABOVE. WE FURTHER AGREE TO PAY, OR, 
AS APPROPRIATE, RECEIVE PAYMENT OF THE CAN-
CELLATION FEE ON OR BEFORE THE AGREED DATE. COMP
ANY NAME 
BY: UNQUOTE ALPHA TRADING COMPANY PLC BY
: 
Appendix 12.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 615/964 ---
Appendix 12.3 Sample letter of 
indemnity 
– issued by charterer to ownerIN THE EVENT THAT THE VESSEL ARRIVES AT THE PORT OF DISCHARGE BUT ORIGINAL 
BILLS OF LADING ARE 
NOT AVAILABLE FOR PRESENTATION IT IS AGREED THAT CHARTERERS SHALL HAVE A RIGHT TO DEMAND THAT OWNERS DISCHARGE THE CARGO ON BOARD THE VESSEL WITHOUT CHARTERERS AND/OR RECEIVERS PRESENTING THE ORIGINAL BILLS OF LADING, ON THE FOLLOWING TERMS AND CONDITIONS: IN CONSIDERATION OF OWNERS DELIVERING ANY CARGO UNDER THIS CHARTER IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH 
CHARTERER’S DEMAND WITHOUT ORIGINAL BILLS OF LADING DULY ENDORSED BEING PRESENTED TO AND RECEIVED BY THE MASTER OR OWNERS, CHARTERERS HEREBY UNDERTAKE TO HOLD OWNERS HARMLESS AND KEEP OWNERS INDEMNIFIED AGAINST VESSEL OR OWNERS BY REASON OF SUCH DELIVERY OF CARGO WITHOUT PRIOR PRESENTATION OF BILLS OF LADING, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY LOSS, DAMAGE OR EXPENSE CAUSED BY ANY ARREST OR DETENTION OF VESSEL. CHARTERERS FURTHER AGREE TO PRODUCE AND DELIVER TO OWNER THE BILLS OF LADING FOR THE CARGO DUL
Y ENDORSED AS SOON AS THESE DOCU-
MENTS HAVE ARRIVED. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 12.3/page 1

--- Page 616/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 617/964 ---
13 Credit control 
Catherine Jago 
13.1 Why is credit control necessary?
13.1.1 Method of doing business
13.1.2 Nature of the market
13.1.3 Risk management
13.2 Assessing credit risk
13.2.1 Amount of money at risk
13.2.2 Political and country risk
13.2.3 Reputation of trading partner
13.2.4 Financial standing of trading partner
13.2.5 Current exposure of trading partner
13.3 Limiting ﬁnancial exposure
13.3.1 Open credit
13.3.2 Parent company guarantee
13.3.3 Letter of Credit
13.3.4 Standby Letter of Credit
13.3.5 Letter of Indemnity
13.3.6 Letter of Intent
13.4 Methods of credit monitoring
13.4.1 Banks
13.4.2 Specialist credit monitoring organisations
13.4.3 Credit associations
13.4.4 In-house credit monitoring
13.4.5 Internet credit sources
Appendix 
13.1 Costs of credit control
13.2 Sample Letter of Credit for a CIF transaction
13.3 Sample Letter of Credit for a FOB transaction
13.4 Sample Letter of Indemnity
13.5 Sample Letter of Intent
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 618/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 619/964 ---
13.1 Why is credit 
control necessary? 
13.1.1 Method of doing business 
The oil industry works on the basis of a gentleman’s agreement – my word is my bond – since almost all business, both futuresand physical, is transacted over the phone. Deals worth millions of dollars are agreed between 2 parties many times every day
, 
with each party trusting that the other will honour what has been agreed. This level of trust also feeds into the payment for the oil. Rarely is payment made for oil before it has loaded, or at the time of loading – although some countries from West Africa, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union use pre-payment as a method of ﬁnancing the development of their oil industry infra-structure. Anybody who enters into this sort of pre-ﬁnanced deal must be very conﬁdent that the oil will actually be delivered. 
Payment may be made before discharge date, perhaps due 
to the contractual terms giving a limited number of days’ 
credit, 
or perhaps the vessel has been delayed in discharging. Payment may be due anything up to 60 days, or even later, after bill of lading date. During this time events might take place which could put pressure on payment being made on due date, or even render the contractual party unable to make the payment. 
Whilst traders may conclude deals which on paper make 
huge proﬁts, these paper proﬁts are meaningless if the other party
, or even a party elsewhere in the chain, fails to perform 
either by not making the oil available or by not taking delivery of it, or by not having the correct ﬁnancial arrangements in place. Credit and performance management therefore should be a vital part of any oil company’s trading department. 
Credit management in all walks of life is no longer a case of 
avoiding bad debts. Nor can a trading company always restrict itself to safe, low risk customers. Even if it did try to do this, oil companies can change overnight from an apparently rock solid ﬁnancial risk, to one which creates a number of headaches. Open positions could amount to several million dollars, and that only on 1 or 2 cargoes! Routine ﬁnancial insurance should feature in most oil transaction contractual terms. 13.1.2 Nature of the market 
The oil market is not a static market in terms of the players in it, the trading mechanisms used and the amount of ﬁnancial risk 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.1/page 1

--- Page 620/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
involved. When crude was priced at $5 per barrel, a cargo of crude 
would be worth approximately 2.5 million dollars. In the early 1980s when crude topped $40 per barrel, the value of a crude cargo went up correspondingly to 20 million dollars. So not only was there the increased risk of non-performance as trading part
-
ners reneged on heavy loss making deals, the absolute ﬁnancial risk was considerably higher
. 
While there are some trading companies which have sur-
vived the rigours of the oil industry for a large number of years, many have not and new companies are continually being set up. A 
trader cannot avoid coming across these new players, and is 
likely to have to consider them at some time as possible trading partners, especially in a difﬁcult market environment. 
It is therefore vital that each trading company has a system 
for measuring the credit worthiness of new trading partners, and for monitoring business with existing trading partners. These systems must be able to react quickly to give an answer to a trader who may have only a short period of time during which he can conclude a deal with a new or existing trading partner
. A 
delay of hours or days may mean that they will lose the deal. Any credit monitoring system must react quickly, must be easily used by traders and must be effective. 
Different markets require different types of credit controls. 
T
rading using regulated markets, such as futures and options 
markets in London, New York and Singapore, are already pro-tected to some extent by the conditions set by the futures exchange for entry to the market. The costs, initial margin calls and brokers fees, are known in advance and, since the trading is done through the exchange, there is no performance risk and the exchange guarantees payment when due. 
There is therefore no need to monitor the credit worthiness 
of other players using the regulated futures and options markets. Indeed, this would not be possible since a trader has no idea with whom he is transacting the business, only the broker with whom they agree the deal. It is then up to the exchange to work out the positions at the end of the trading monthly period and determine who owes oil into the system and who is owed oil, or money if the settlement is not by physical delivery
. 
However, when establishing a futures position a trader con-
tracts with the broker who then in turn contracts with the exchange to take the futures position. The broker acts as the prin-cipal to the market. Thus it is the broker that receives the pro-tection of the exchange, not the trader. The trader therefore has complete exposure to the futures broker of his futures position 
13.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 621/964 ---
13 Credit control
and any funds he may have placed with the broker. When choos-ing a broker with whom to transact futures business, one should consider very carefully the broker
’s ﬁnancial position, and 
monitor this throughout the time of trading futures with this broker, considering, as best as possible, not only the positions you may have with the broker, but positions other customers may have with your broker also. 
One way of limiting this exposure is to insist that margin 
money be held in a segregated account, separated from the broker
’s other funds. When negotiating brokers commissions, the 
fee charged is likely to be higher if a segregated account is used, and the interest rate payable on funds in a segregated account is likely to be lower than that offered for a non-segregated account. However, this small cost might be considered worthwhile for the ﬁnancial security it gives you. 
All other forms of oil trading expose the player to much more 
signiﬁcant ﬁnancial risk. This includes markets involving any over the counter (OTC) business such as swaps and options, for-ward paper trading and all physical transactions, none of which have such stringent entry requirements or are underwritten by a clearing organisation. 
In theory, anyone could start ringing round potential players 
claiming to be interested in taking out a position. So long as they can prove that they have or will have ownership of oil to the satisfaction of the prospective purchaser
, or that they have 
sufﬁcient funds to pay for the oil, or perhaps just an on-going sale so that they only need to ﬁnance the margin, then anyone could become an oil trader. Should this individual be less than scrupulous, he could walk away from a deal, having agreed it over the phone, without the other side being able to receive any compensation, except through the courts, which are costly and laborious. 13.1.3 Risk management 
The recent highly visible and serious losses incurred as a result of the use of derivatives have led the senior management in many oil companies to examine the effectiveness of their existing risk management practices, especially with regard to the control and reporting procedures for staff who regularly trade in these markets. 
In 1993, the US-based organisation of senior bankers, aca-
demics and derivative market participants known as the “Group of Thirty” published an important set of recommendations based 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.1/page 3

--- Page 622/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
on best practice for companies involved in trading derivatives.§ 
The G30 report addressed key issues including the role of man-agement, the need to de-mystify derivatives, the measurement of market risks and the systems required. 
Any company involved in 
the oil market, especially those using the more elaborate deriva-tive contracts that form such a large part of many oil traders’ portfolio of activities, should look very carefully at its methods of managing and containing the risks associated with trading deriv-atives and satisfy itself that the necessary controls and report-ing systems are in place. 
The Group of Thirty continue to play a role in making rec-
ommendations of best practices for front, middle and back ofﬁce functions and their reports can now be accessed via the internet.* These surveys of industry practice make interesting reading, demonstrating as they do that some companies are continuing to put their business at considerable risk by not following even the most basic of best practice recommendations. 
Additional 
information can be obtained from the Bank for International Settlements
† and the International Swaps and Derivatives 
Association.‡ These organisations, amongst others, are helping to 
co-ordinate the process following on from the G30 initial report. 
An area of current contention is that of accounting practices 
for derivative business ( see Chapter 14 ). Increasingly government 
tax authorities are insisting that all derivatives taken out as hedges are matched to the corresponding physical transaction at the time rather than claiming a derivative position was a hedge rather than speculative once the company gets to completing their accounts. Following on from this they are recommending that mark-to-market accounting is best practice, that is all out-standing positions are marked against today’s price, rather than hedge accounting which they consider can manipulate and mask the true ﬁnancial position of a company
. 
One particularly important area of risk management that 
requires considerable caution is that of the legal risk associated with doing business with government or municipality organisa-tions. During the mid-1990s a number of municipal bodies decided they would use derivatives such as long term interest rate swaps to manage their ﬁnances and to make money
. When 
§Derivatives: Practices and Principles, Group of Thirty Global 
Derivatives Study Group, July 1993 * www.group30.org 
†www.bis.org 
‡www.isda.org 
13.1/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 623/964 ---
13 Credit control
these deals turned sour they claimed that they did not have the authority to conclude the deals, and the courts found in their favour. Trading companies should therefore be cautious in trans-acting with such bodies, and ensure that their counter-parties do indeed have regulatory approval for the transactions they wish to carry out. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.1/page 5

--- Page 624/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 625/964 ---
13.2 Assessing credit risk 
When judging the credit worthiness of a prospective trading partner, there are a number of considerations and a variety of information which must be reviewed. Some of this will be back-ground information which can be updated at regular intervals, for example company accounts if ﬁled, staff, term contracts, types of business, capital assets etc. However
, much of it will need to 
be updated more often, and even checked immediately before con-cluding a deal. 13.2.1 Amount of money at risk 
If the amount of money at risk is relatively small in terms of oil trading deals, then the credit worthiness of the potential trading partner is not of such great concern. For example, a barge lot of 2,000 metric tonnes of fuel oil costing $60 per tonne would be worth in total $120,000. However
, a one million barrel ULCC 
(Ultra-large Crude Carrier) of Dubai crude costing $20 per barrel would be worth $20 million. In the case of the latter deal, very carefully consideration should be made to the credit worthiness of the trading partner. 
Having said that, though, to some small trading companies 
the barge deal could be a signiﬁcant amount of money
, and to a 
large trading company with assets in the millions, the ULCC of Dubai is just one of many deals they would transact in a day. So the size of the ﬁnancial exposure should be judged against the prospective trading partner’s own ﬁnancial standing. Equally if your own ﬁnancial situation is shaky, then any deal, however small, must be carefully checked for ﬁnancial security. 13.2.2 Political and country risk 
If a cargo of oil is being sourced or delivered into a part of the world which has been the subject of recent political instability
, 
care must be taken to ensure that all the correct channels are used for negotiations and payments. Although much political risk cannot be prejudged since insurrections can occur without any prior warning, there are areas of the world which are known to be politically unstable. This risk has to be weighed up against the reward from concluding the deal. 
A trader transacting much of his business in these more dif-
ﬁcult parts of the world should take time to keep himself up to date with the political events, and to keep his ear to the ground 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.2/page 1

--- Page 626/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
about possible changes which might cause problems or even 
render his transactions worthless. Many Eastern European coun -
tries, for example, require that business be transacted via the correct governmental departments, and government controlled banks. 
Any trader looking to do business in these countries 
should make sure that he is fully aware of these correct channels and take advice from the appropriate trade bureaux. 13.2.3 Reputation of trading partner 
Although the industry is an international one, the number of active players is relatively small for each part of the market, for example companies trading in Russian fuel oil might amount to only 20. Through these close knit groups, information about com-panies, especially if it is unfavourable such as reneging on a deal, gets disseminated quickly
. Records should therefore be kept, 
having made attempts to conﬁrm or refute any rumours, for future reference. 
Other considerations include whether this potential trading 
partner is known to be experienced in the area of the market which he is now offering to do business in, or is this a new venture for him into oil per se or a different part of the oil market? Obvi-ously traders need to diversify, and they will have to start some-where before moving up the learning curve, but inexperienced traders may make mistakes or not be familiar with the impor-tance of certain speciﬁcations. This can cause as many problems if you are the inexperienced trader as it can if you have the inex-perienced trader on the other side of the deal. 
If you are moving into a new market, you must familiarise 
yourself with the important factors involved in trading in that market. Otherwise, you could leave yourself open to being taken advantage of by more experienced and perhaps less scrupulous traders who might take advantage of your ignorance to off-load off-spec or otherwise incorrect cargoes. In this case a par -
ticularly careful eye must be kept on contractual terms, and operations. 
Has the trader got sound supply contacts? If you are buying 
from a trader who is in turn buying it from someone else, if his seller reneges or supplies off-spec oil, you could inherit their problem in some form or other
. Is the operations department of 
the company effective and reliable? A deal which can be making good proﬁt on paper can end up being a loser if you have to spend a great deal of time and money on demurrage bills, quality prob-lems and so on. 
13.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 627/964 ---
13 Credit control
13.2.4 Financial standing of trading partner 
Any good credit monitoring system should include as much base ﬁnancial data on potential trading partners as possible. Included in this should be an indication of the size of the company
, and a 
feel for the overheads. For example, a large trading company may have to cover overheads of $1 million per month for their ofﬁce before they ever make money for the shareholders. This puts tremendous pressure on the company to do high volume, proﬁt-able business to cover these costs. 
It is also important to know the extent of capital backing for 
the company
, to gauge whether a bad position can be ﬁnanced 
internally. Much of this information is extremely difﬁcult to obtain for trading companies, since few are publicly quoted com-panies. Most are privately owned with no requirement to publish results or to divulge ﬁnancial information which they tend to keep close to their chests. 13.2.5 Current exposure of trading partner 
One of the more difﬁcult evaluations that has to be made is to assess the current market exposure of a potential trading partner
. While it is clearly important to avoid dealing with a 
company that might be over-exposed and therefore at risk from defaults by other companies, it is extremely difﬁcult to obtain factual information on this issue. 
If a potential trading partner already has a number of loss 
making positions, and its ﬁnancial standing is not good anyway
, 
you would be wise to avoid transacting business with the trader without very secure ﬁnancial guarantees. Naturally, a trader does not want its position known on the market, since this would restrict its ability to trade out of its loss making positions. It is not going to divulge its book to anyone. 
Information about traders’ positions therefore has to be 
gleaned from other market sources, and collated so that a sen-sible estimate can be made. By necessity, this will be a guess and will be far from accurate. Indeed, with many traders hedging their positions on the futures markets or doing complicated spread and arbitrage business between various markets, it is always risky to second-guess traders’ 
positions. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.2/page 3

--- Page 628/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 629/964 ---
13.3 Limiting ﬁnancial exposure 
Once an assessment of the various parameters affecting a poten-tial trading partner’s credit worthiness and the possible risks involved has been made, it is necessary to decide on the credit terms to be used in the contractual terms of any deal. 
In some cases it may be decided that the credit worthiness 
of the company is so bad that it excludes the possibility of doing any business with the company
. This is not unusual, since many 
companies have strict limits about the size of any companies they may do business with, and this may keep their list of possible trading partners short. As a result, some well known but small companies may be excluded from the list of potential trading partners that another company will deal with. 13.3.1 Open credit 
If you are conﬁdent that the company concerned carries no ﬁnan-cial risk in terms of guaranteeing payment for a deal, then you might consider doing business on open credit. In which case, the seller of the oil has no formal ﬁnancial guarantee that payment will be made for the oil except that given by the company buying within the terms of the contract. Because of this, open credit is reserved generally for business done with oil majors and multi-nationals. 13.3.2 Parent company guarantee 
If a trading company is part of a large organisation which has substantial funds, then business transacted by the trading company which is acting as the principal may be secured using a ﬁnancial guarantee supplied by the parent company
. Effectively 
this means giving the trading company open credit and care must be taken that the parent company has been carefully screened for its own credit worthiness. Some traders came unstuck in 1991 when a well known trader with whom people traded on parent company guarantee sent shock waves through the industry as its parent company faltered under fraud charges. 13.3.3 Letter of Credit 
Much oil trading business is concluded using a Letter of Credit (LC) as a ﬁnancial guarantee. Once in place, an LC guarantees that, so long as the correct documents, or a Letter of Indemnity 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.3/page 1

--- Page 630/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
(LOI), are presented to the buyer ’s bank, the buyer’s bank will 
honour the LC and make the appropriate payments due for the cargo. 
The following documents are generally required by the 
buyer’s bank before it will honour the Letter of Credit: 
1.	A signed commercial invoice indicating the destination of the cargo. 
2.	3 out of 3 of the original Bills of Lading issued or endorsed to the order of the buyer
. 
3.	A certiﬁcate of quality and quantity. 
4.	An insurance certiﬁcate. 
A Bill of Lading is a legal document of title to the oil, and is essen-tially a receipt by the master for the cargo. Unless a buyer is in possession of a Bill of Lading he cannot claim a cargo. Originally when shipping moved considerably slower than now
, three Bills 
of Lading were actually needed so that one could be sent on ahead, on board a faster clipper vessel. In order to collect the goods from the vessel, this advance copy of the Bill of Lading had to be presented to the master before he would release his cargo. 
The documents must always be presented to the bank, and 
the Letter of Credit is always brought into effect in a deal ﬁnan-cially guaranteed by the LC. A bank would normally charge between 0.10 and 0.15 per cent of the total value of the cargo, although there may be a ﬁxed charge lower limit. These fees are negotiable and will be increased if the LC is conﬁrmed by the bank of both parties. This may occur if the seller is unsure about the calibre of the buyer
’s bank or the country in which the LC 
opening bank is located. 
The normal contractual phrase which would appear in the 
contract would state that “ the buyer is to open an irrevocable 
Letter of Credit in a format and from a Bank acceptable to the seller ”. The seller would then be guided by his own bank who 
might suggest that they guarantee it as well in certain cases. In which case, the seller and buyer would have to come to some arrangement about sharing this additional cost. 
The contract would normally stipulate that the LC be opened 
on nomination of the vessel, even specifying the time of the day by which it must be opened. If the LC is not opened in time, the seller has the right to declare the deal null and void, although under normal trading conditions they are unlikely to do so. However
, if the market has subsequently moved up, the seller 
may well be looking for an opportunity of re-offering the cargo at a higher price. 
13.3/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 631/964 ---
13 Credit control
One way of overcoming problems attached to the late set up 
of a Letter of Credit, in cases where both parties are keen for the deal to progress, involves each party’s respective banks ringing the other to check whether the LC is being prepared, even requesting this statement in writing. In normal cases, the LC must be valid for 30–45 days after Bill of Lading or at least until 15 days, say, after payment is due. 
Although a Letter of Credit provides an excellent guarantee, 
there are a number of pitfalls which can render the guarantee invalid if they are not handled correctly
. 
First, the payment will only be made if the correct docu-
ments are presented to the bank. If they cannot be presented to the bank then payment will not be made, unless some guarantee has previously been given that the seller has ownership of the cargo and will indemnify the buyer against all legal costs related to the loss of the documents. This is generally done in the form of a Letter of Indemnity ( see below ) and a Letter of Credit must 
always contain the option for payment to be made against a Letter of Indemnity
. 
Secondly, a Letter of Credit is issued by a bank. It is there-
fore only as secure as the bank. Thus it is vital that the LC should be issued by a ﬁrst class bank, and contracts will normally specify this when stipulating that a Letter of Credit is necessary
. 
Finally, a Letter of Credit is a purely ﬁnancial undertaking 
by a bank and therefore does not take account of changes in the actual speciﬁcation of the contract or cargo. 
An LC is therefore a 
very powerful tool, particularly if it gets into the wrong hands. As well as committing the buyer’s bank to make the payments due, it also ties the seller to do certain things. 
For example, if the Letter of Credit speciﬁes that the quality 
should be 1 per cent max, but the certiﬁcate of quality says 0.4 per cent, the bank may say that the documents are not in order and that they want a certiﬁcate of quality saying that the cargo loaded was 1 per cent max before making payment. In extreme cases you might lose the cargo value or it can cause considerable delays in receiving payments, which costs money
. 
The format of any Letter of Credit should therefore be scru-
tinised for any possible loop-holes in order to make it the effec-tive guarantee that it should be if it is worded correctly ( see 
Chapter 17 ). 
13.3.4 Standby Letter of Credit 
As an alternative to a full Letter of Credit, a standby Letter of Credit may be used. In the US this type of arrangement is 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.3/page 3

--- Page 632/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
referred to as a Guarantee. A standby Letter of Credit is also a 
guarantee given by a bank that payment will be made, on presen -
tation of the correct documents, but is generally only called upon if payment is not readily made for some reason. 
Unlike a deal guaranteed by the LC, the documents would 
normally be presented directly to the buyer rather than to the bank in order to generate payment. Only if for some reason payment is not made will copies of the documents go to the bank together with a statement saying that the invoice has been pre-sented, but payment not made. The bank will then make the payment to the seller
. 
A standby Letter of Credit is a simpler document than a full 
LC. However
, it is generally only used when the amount of money 
involved in the transaction is small, or the companies involved are very large and therefore likely to be more credit worthy. As a standby LC is not usually drawn, the fees charged by banks are slightly lower. 13.3.5 Letter of Indemnity 
The purpose of a Letter of Indemnity (LOI) is to indemnify the buyer against the seller not having the necessary documents, especially the original Bills of Lading, to prove that he has title to the oil which he has sold. When a LC is used a LOI must be set up and incorporated as an option within the LC. Where a LC is not used, then a LOI is still required if documents are not avail-able. The responsibility for issuing a LOI rests with the seller. 
In most cases, unless one is dealing with a major oil company 
or a multi national, the LOI is countersigned by a bank for addi-tional security. Among other things, the wording of the LOI says that “ the seller warrants that they have marketable title to the 
cargo free and clear of any lien or encumbrance ”. This last phrase 
is important, because it ensures that the buyer inherits no prob-lems from parties further up a chain. The LOI also indemniﬁes the buyer against all costs and damages from third parties claim-ing title. Thus all oil deals will be paid either against documents or a LOI. 
A LOI expires when the correct documents are supplied to 
the buyer
’s bank. In cases of mislaid documents, or in cases of 
long chains, some of which have amounted to over 100 players, this can take a considerable length of time. The cost of setting up a LOI is negotiable, but is likely to be in the region of 0.05 per cent of the total value of the cargo, and is paid for by the seller. Fees for bank LOIs may be negotiated as a ﬂat rate on a per annum basis. 
13.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 633/964 ---
13 Credit control
13.3.6 Letter of Intent 
A Letter of Intent is a document supplied by the buyer and sent to the seller
’s bank, expressly conﬁrming that the buyer, has 
bought a speciﬁc cargo at a speciﬁc price or formula, and there-fore will be paying this amount into the seller’s bank on a par-ticular day. 
In terms of ﬁnancial security such a letter means very little. 
However
, it may serve to appease an anxious seller’s bank. In 
most cases it also helps the seller to re-ﬁnance the transaction with his bank. It is generally used by major oil companies and multinationals, who would not expect to issue letters of credit. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.3/page 5

--- Page 634/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 635/964 ---
13.4 Methods of credit monitoring 
13.4.1 Banks 
Banks can be a good source of information and advice about credit monitoring and the credit worthiness of other companies. 
Your 
own bank is likely to have heard of many of the companies you are likely to do business with, and if they have not, they will be well placed to use the banking network to speak to other bankers to ﬁnd out what information is available. Obviously it is in your bank’s interest to help you maintain a good and effective credit monitoring system for all business you transact. 
It is also possible for you to contact your potential trading 
partner
’s bank directly and ask pertinent questions. Whilst they 
are not obliged to answer all your questions, especially without consulting their client, they are likely to be able to supply you with information which will help you to reach a decision about whether to progress further with any business. 
For example, a bank is not obliged to divulge ownership 
details, nor will they hand over ﬁnancial information unless their client agrees, but much information can perhaps be obtained from what is not said, as much as from what is said. Banks obvi-ously will only take clients on if they themselves consider them credit worthy
. They will want to see their potential client’s 
balance sheets, be supplied with extensive background informa-tion including ownership details, and will themselves perhaps contact a specialised credit monitoring organisation, who can supply information such as the reputation of the company and the traders in the company
. 
Depending on the outcome of these investigations, the 
running of the account with the bank will vary
. For example, 
whilst realised losses might not be payable until the position is liquidated, some banks will ask smaller clients, especially those with perhaps offshore ownership, to post margins at intervals, rather than when the position is liquidated. Some might ask for an amount greater than the margins to be deposited, even asking for the full value of the cargo in some circumstances when the account is new. 
However, while checks by banks on new clients are exhaus-
tive, in most cases banks will leave their clients to do their own credit checks on their trading partners. They might recommend that they monitor credit on an ongoing basis, but would not insist that this be handled in a particular way
. 
It is an important legal protection for banks, that while they 
will advise, if requested, about the ﬁnancial status of possible 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.4/page 1

--- Page 636/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
business partners, the ultimate decision about who to trade with 
is made by the client, the bank having no control over the activ -
ities of their clients. Though this has never been successfully legally tested, banks are concerned that a creditor of a bankrupt company might sue the company’
s bank on the basis that it had 
overall control. Most bankers will therefore insist that they do not participate or beneﬁt from the business of their client, but assist their clients in concluding business. Whilst this assistance is not always free, much free advice can be obtained by regular communications and a good relationship with one’s bank. 13.4.2 Specialist credit monitoring organisations 
There are a number of different types of specialist credit monitor-ing organisations that can help you assess the credit-worthiness of a potential trading partner
. These include: 
Basic credit information suppliers These are companies that spend their time collating readily available information about other companies, and supplying this information, for a fee, in a variety of different ways. Such companies only tend to have limited data on oil companies, espe-cially those which are not limited companies, or the continental equivalent. 
One example of such an organisation is Dun and Brad­
street , now trading as D&B
. D&B was founded nearly 160 years 
ago and now holds business information on 65 million companies worldwide. Information is gathered in 214 countries. However, their coverage of information on oil companies is limited by the secrecy of these companies, many of which are privately owned and registered in countries where it is extremely difﬁcult to obtain ownership details. 
Most of the information that D&B supplies is published 
information which they collate and transmit in a user friendly way
, including the internet.§ However, they can serve a purpose 
for supplying the latest published ﬁnancial information about some companies. D&B can also supply products and services 
tailor-made to your own requirements, such as competitor analy-sis or corporate analysis on a speciﬁc company covering owner-ship details and ﬁnancial information. 
§www.dnb.com 
13.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 637/964 ---
13 Credit control
Other companies supplying similar information include 
Graydon International, * Standard and Poor’s,† Moody’s,‡ 
and Equifax ** (now includes Infocheck ). 
Company accounts specialists If the information required is mainly ﬁnancial information about well known, and therefore well reported, companies, a company such as John S. Herold
†† might suit your needs. They analyse 
and appraise the accounts of a speciﬁc but large number of oil companies in the US and elsewhere. As well as looking at the companies’ annual accounts and their stock exchange values where appropriate, they will make estimations on the amount, value and life of oil and gas reserves owned by the company, esti-mate future operating proﬁts plus many other factors. The infor-mation is supplied at regular intervals, and is not customer generated but a standard range of companies are analysed at dif-fering times of the year. Thus this type of service is very useful for adding to one’
s own in-house monitoring system, but is of little 
use on its own for the immediate response to a trader’s query “Is this company a suitable trading partner right now?” Specialist company information suppliers In order to meet more comprehensively the needs of an oil trading company which is conscientiously monitoring credit risk, one needs to turn to a specialist organisation set up speciﬁcally for the needs of the credit departments of oil companies, such as 
§MRC Business Information .MRC is based in Oxford, 
England and offers a variety of services that draw on an exten-sive data-bank of international oil companies, including compa-nies registered in sheltered tax havens. 
MRC responds to clients’ 
 requests as well as supplying stan-
dard reports companies in the energy sector using a database of information on some 90,000 marine and related companies. The response to an enquiry is researched speciﬁcally for each client, with the information kept on a database updated each 
* www.graydonint.com 
†www.standardandpoors.com 
‡www.moodys.com 
** www.equifax.com 
††www.herold.com
§www.mrcinfo.com
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.4/page 3

--- Page 638/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
time information on that company is requested. This means that 
the client can focus the research on the aspect of the company which is of most interest such as its Far East ofﬁce or its trading in Russian oil, or ask MRC to investigate rumours such as “the 
company is very long in a falling market”. The answers to queries can be written reports, verbal replies or even online for shipping companies. 
Such a tailor-made service is, naturally, more expensive than 
the other services mentioned above, but costs must be weighed against the scale of the risks involved. It is also limited by the secrecy of some companies. 
Another company which supplies similar reports, alth-
ough mainly on shipping companies, is Dynamar BV
§ in the 
Netherlands. 13.4.3 Credit associations 
The International Energy Credit 
 Association (IECA) ,* is the 
largest association of petroleum industry credit and ﬁnancial executives in the world, with membership covering oil trading companies spread over the United States, Canada and Europe. The IECA seeks to promote the interests of credit and ﬁnancial professionals in the oil industry, and to assist members in acquir-ing up to date skills and techniques, so helping them to make improved contributions to their companies and to the well being of the industry
. 
The IECA organises annual conferences in the US attended 
by many members and which deal with matters of real and prac-tical concern to the members through a mixture of speakers drawn from government, academia, banking, industry and the legal profession, and through informal discussion groups. 
Annual 
conferences are also held in Canada and Europe by the Canadian Credit Group and the European Division of the IECA. But perhaps the greatest beneﬁt from membership of this organisa-tion is the opportunity it provides for networking amongst the members, in particular through membership of the 
Association’s 
Crude Oil and Reﬁned Products Credit Group (CORP), which enables members to keep up to date with risk management developments. 
§www.dynamar.com 
* www.ieca.net 
13.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 639/964 ---
13 Credit control
13.4.4 In-house credit monitoring 
Like so many service industries, the services offered by the companies mentioned above could be handled in-house, by buying in the expertise and committing staff to the tasks involved. However
, the information that a credit person working for an 
oil company can obtain is likely to be different, and may be more limited, than the information which can be obtained by a third party who has no vested interest in the information other than obtaining it and disseminating it to his client for a fee. 
The organisations mentioned above spend their time 
researching and collating the information. T
o match this would 
require staff devoted to this task, and even then many companies would be less likely to talk to you as a potential competitor than they might an information gathering organisation. On the other hand, if one is making an enquiry about a company with a view to doing business with that company, they may well be happy to supply information to you about themselves, more so than they might supply to a credit monitoring company. 
However, it might be very difﬁcult for you to obtain infor-
mation about the company from its trading partners. In addition, the staff in the information gathering companies are likely to have a bevy of contacts built up over a long period of time, all of whom can supply pieces of information which can then be put together in an easily usable format, thereby saving your staff con-siderable time and effort. 
As a trader you will come across much useful information 
about other trading companies in the course of the day
. In order 
not to waste this information, a system should be set up to allow for easy input of this to help build up an in-house database of existing and potential trading partners. It is vital that any system created should be user friendly otherwise it will not be used and therefore not regularly updated as information is obtained. At a more mundane level, it also helps if credit staff are physically located close to traders. This makes them not only easily accessible to traders to answer their queries, but also within earshot of traders’ conversations from which they might well be able to glean snippets of information which might not otherwise be passed on to them. 
Any in-house credit monitoring system should therefore use 
the full range of the services available, depending on the types of trading partners, the size of the business and the status of the company itself. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 13.4/page 5

--- Page 640/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
13.4.5 Internet credit sources 
The massive rise in popularity of the internet as a source for information has provided interested parties with a wealth of online information about companies that is now relatively easy to access at the press of a button. Access to up to date company accounts is much easier and quicker. Gone are the days of waiting for the annual reports to be printed and posted out. Many company sites also have help pages where questions can be asked of the company. Searches on newspapers and specialist publica-tions are also easier and faster. 
In addition a number of specialist credit monitoring orga-
nisations make their services available on-line ( see 13.4.2 
above ). Useful lists of credit reporting services are also compiled 
by internet-based companies such as Creditworthy .
§ However, 
it should be remembered that much can be implied through voice inﬂection which is totally lost through the internet or e-mail responses. Nothing can replace the quality of information, par-ticularly around sensitive areas such as credit status, that people may be prepared to disclose either over the phone or face-to-face as opposed to in written or internet form. 
§www.creditworthy.com 
13.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 641/964 ---
Appendix 13.1 Costs of credit 
control 
Contractual terms Cost Who pays? 
Open Credit Parent Company Guarantee Letter of Credit Standby Letter of Credit Letter of Indemnity Letter of Intent Nil 
Nil 
0.1–0.15% 
Buyer, the cost of his bank 
0.5–0.1% Seller, the cost of his bank 
0.05% Seller 
Nil 
Credit monitoring organisations Approximate cost 
Basic credit information $50–100 per basic company proﬁle Company accounts specialists 
$1,000–1,500 for 100 companies 
Specialist company information $750–1,500 per full company report 
In-house: staff, computer systems, training courses, conferences 
plus purchased information. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.1/page 1

--- Page 642/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 643/964 ---
Appendix 13.2 Sample Letter of 
Credit for a CIF transaction 
TO: SELLER FROM: BUYER’S BANK WE HEREBY OPEN OUR IRREVOCABLE DOCUMENTARY LETTER OF CREDIT NUMBER 000.00: BY ORDER AND FOR 
ACCOUNT OF: BUYER 
IN F
AVOUR OF : SELLER 
FOR AN AMOUNT OF : TOTAL VALUE OF CARGO ± 10% 
VALIDITY : UNTIL 31 JANUARY 2002 
AND AVAILABLE BY DEFERRED PAYMENT WITH VALUE 10 DAYS FROM/AFTER BILL OF LADING AT THE COUNTER OF OPENING OR ADVISING OR CONFIRMING BANK AGAINST PRESENTATION OF THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS IN ONE ORIGINAL AND 3 COPIES, UNLESS OTHERWISE REQUESTED: 1. – DULY SIGNED COMMERCIAL INVOICE (INDICATING DESTINA
TION OF CARGO) 
2. – 3/3 ORIGINAL CLEAN ‘SHIPPED ON BOARD’ OCEAN BILLS OF LADING ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO THE ORDER OF BUYER OR BUYER’S BANK MARKED ‘FREIGHT PREP
AID’ OR ‘FREIGHT PAYABLE AS PER CHARTER PARTY’ 
OR ‘FREIGHT PAYABLE AS AGREED’ OR ‘FREIGHT PAYABLE AS ARRANGED’. B/L TO BE ORIGINALLY SIGNED BY MASTER OR VESSEL AGENT AT LOAD PORT. 3. - CERTIFICATE OF QUALITY ISSUED FOR LOAD PORT EVIDENCING PRODUCT IS NORMAL 
RUSSIAN GASOIL 
HAVING POUR POINT MAX -10 DEG C AND SULPHUR MAX 0.2 WT PER CENT (ALTERNATIVELY IF CARGO IS NOT RUSSIAN, THEN CERTIFICA
TE OF QUALITY ISSUED 
AND/OR COUNTERSIGNED B Y... WOULD BE ESSENTIAL). 
4. – NEGOTIABLE INSURANCE CERTIFICATE OR POLICY ISSUED BY XXXXX, FOR MINIMUM 100 PER CENT OF THE CIF INVOICE V
ALUE WITH PARTICULAR AVERAGE, 
SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH 2 P2 OF THE TRANSPORT INSURANCE RULES, INCLUDING MIXING AND/OR CONTA-MINATION INCLUDING LEAKAGE AND/OR SHORTAGE IN 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.2/page 1

--- Page 644/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
EXCESS OF 0.5 PER CENT EACH T ANK OR ON THE WHOLE 
AND/OR NEGOTIABLE WESTERN INSURANCE CERTIFI -
CATE OR POLICY ISSUED FOR MIN 110 PER CENT OF CIF INVOICE V
ALUE AS PER BULK OIL CLAUSES INCLUDING 
THE RISKS OF LEAKAGE AND/OR SHORTAGE HOWSO-EVER ARISING SUBJECT TO AN EXCESS OF 0.5 PER CENT TRADE ULLAGE ON WHOLE SHIPMENT
, INCLUDING THE 
RISKS OF CONTAMINATION HOWSOEVER ARISING IRRE-SPECTIVE OF PERCENTAGE. ORIGINAL INSURANCE CER-TIFICA
TE(S) TO BE ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO BUYER 
COMBINATION OF BOTH FOR AT LEAST 100 PER CENT OF CIF INVOICE VALUE ACCEPTABLE. IF DOCUMENTS 2–4 ARE NOT AVAILABLE ON DUE DATE, P
AYMENT WILL BE MADE AGAINST: 
1. COMMERCIAL INVOICE AS UNDER DOCUMENT NO 1 2. SELLER’S LETTER OF INDEMNITY COUNTERSIGNED BYB
A N K...I N  T H E  F O L L O W I N G  F ORMAT: 
[SEE APPENDIX 4 FOR SAMPLE LETTER OF INDEMNITY] COVERING: 19,224.354 METRIC TONS OF NORMAL RUS-SIAN GASOIL ON M/T “THE GOOD SHIP LOLLIPOP” /SUB A
VAILABLE EX SOVIET BALTIC SEA. 
PRICE: $170 PER METRIC TON CIF ONE OR TWO SAFE BERTHS/PORTS HAMBURG - 
AMSTERDAM - ROTTERDAM -
ANTWERP ON NON-EEC BASIS ON B/L QUANTITY. DELIVERY :
  D U R I N G  T H E  P E R I O D... I N SELLER’S VESSEL 
“THE GOOD SHIP LOLLIPOP” OR SUITABLE SUBSTITUTE AS PART CARGO CIF ONE OR TWO SAFE BERTHS/PORTS HAMBURG-AMSTERDAM-ROTTERDAM-ANTWERP WITH B/L DATED 5 JANUARY 2002 IN VENTSPILS. SPECIAL CONDITIONS : 
– PARTIAL SHIPMENTS AND TRANS-SHIPMENTS PRO-HIBITED – PART CARGO ALLOWED – CHARTER PARTY B/L ARE ACCEPTABLE – DOCUMENTS PRESENTED LATER THAN 21 DAYS AFTER B/L 
DATE BUT STILL WITH THE VALIDITY OF THE CREDIT 
ARE ACCEPTABLE 
Appendix 13.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 645/964 ---
13 Credit control
– PHOTOCOPIES FOR COPY DOCUMENTS ARE ACCEPT-ABLE – SHIPPING DOCUMENTS SHOWING LARGER OR DIFFER-ENT DISCHARGE RANGE THAN 
ALLOWED FOR UNDER 
PARAGRAPH DELIVERY HERE ABOVE ACCEPTABLE – SPELLING MISTAKES IN VESSEL’S NAME ACCEPTABLE – BILL OF LADING AND OTHER SHIPPING DOCUMENTS (EXCEPT INVOICE 
AND LETTER OF INDEMNITY) ISSUED 
BY THIRD PARTY ACCEPTABLE – TELEX INVOICE, TELEX LOI, BOTH DULY TESTED, ACCEPT
ABLE 
REIMBURSEMENT UPON RECEIPT AT OUR (BUYER’S BANK) COUNTERS IN GENEV
A OF DOCUMENTS ISSUED IN STRICT CONFOR-
MITY WITH THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE PRESENT LETTER OF CREDIT
, WE UNDERTAKE TO COVER 
YOU ON DUE DATE AS PER YOUR INSTRUCTIONS PRO-VIDED HOWEVER THAT SUCH DOCUMENTS REACH OUR BANK NOT LA
TER THAN 10 A.M. GENEVA TIME ON DUE 
DATE, OTHERWISE PAYMENT WILL BE EFFECTED WITH VALUE 1 BANK WORKING DAY. UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED, THIS DOCUMENTARY CREDIT IS SUBJECT TO THE UNIFORM CUSTOMS 
AND 
PRACTICE FOR DOCUMENTARY CREDITS, I.C.C. BROCHURE NO 400 (1983 REVISION). THIS TELEX MESSAGE REPRESENTS THE OPERATIVE CREDIT INSTRUMENT 
AND NO WRITTEN CONFIRMATION 
WILL FOLLOW. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.2/page 3

--- Page 646/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 647/964 ---
Appendix 13.3 Sample Letter of 
Credit for a FOB transaction 
TO: OPENING BANK FROM: BUYER PLS. OPEN STILL TODAY BY TELEX FOLLOWING IRREVO-CABLE DOCUMENTARY LETTER OF CREDIT NO ..., 
WHICH PLS 
ADVISE TO BENEFICIARY WITHOUT ADDING 
YOUR CONFIRMATION: BY ORDER AND FOR ACCOUNT OF: BUYER (FULL TITLE AND ADDRESS) IN F
AVOUR OF: SELLER (FULL TITLE AND ADDRESS) 
FOR AN AMOUNT OF US DOLLARS :...P L U S / M I N U S  1 0  P E R 
CENT (IN WORDS UNITED STATES DOLLAR S... ) 
PAYABLE 30 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER BILL OF LADING DATE AT OUR COUNTERS I N...A G A I N S T PRESENTATION 
OF THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS TO BE ISSUED IN ONE ORIGINAL PLUS 4 (FOUR) COPIES UNLESS OTHERWISE STATED: 1. SIGNED COMMERCIAL INVOICE 2. 3/3 (FULL SET) ORIGINAL MARINE BILLS OF LADING ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO THE ORDER OF ...M
A R K E D : 
“FREIGHT PAYABLE AS PER C/P” / “CLEAN ON BOARD”, SHOWING DESTINATION . . . , PLUS 6 NON-NEGOTIABLE COPIES 3. EEC-QUALIFICATION CERTIFICATE “T2L” ISSUED AND ST
AMPED BY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OR CUSTOMS 
AUTHORITIES (DEPENDING ON ORIGIN AND DESTINA-TION – OTHER CASES REPLACED BY “CERTIFICATE OF ORIGIN ISSUED 
AND/OR COUNTERSIGNED BY . . .) 
4. CERTIFICATE OF QUANTITY ISSUED AND/OR COUN-TERSIGNED BY INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR FOR LOAD PORT 5. CERTIFICATE OF QUALITY ISSUED AND/OR COUNTER-SIGNED BY INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR FOR LOAD PORT SHOWING THE PRODUCT MEETS THE FOLLOWING GUAR-ANTEED SPECIFICATIONS: [INSERT LIST OF SPECIFICATIONS HERE] 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.3/page 1

--- Page 648/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
6. ULLAGE REPORT ISSUED AND/OR COUNTERSIGNED BY 
INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR FOR LOAD PORT (OPTIONAL) 
7. TIME SHEET COUNTERSIGNED BY INDEPENDENTINSPECTOR 
AND MASTER (OPTIONAL) 
8. MASTER’S RECEIPT FOR SAMPLES, COUNTERSIGNEDBY MASTER 9. MASTER’S RECEIPT FOR COPY OF ALL DOCUMENTS MENTIONED HEREIN EXCEPT FOR DOC NO. 1 IN THE CASE OF NON-AVAILABILITY OF ALL OR PART OF THE 
ABOVE LISTED DOCUMENTS 2 TO 9, THE LETTER OF 
CREDIT MAY BE PAYABLE AGAINST PRESENTATION OF THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS: 1. COMMERCIAL INVOICE AS ABOVE 
2. LETTER OF INDEMNITY ISSUED IN THE FOLLOWINGFORMA
T 
[SEE APPENDIX 4 FOR SAMPLE LETTER OF INDEMNITY] PRICE CLAUSE: . . . C
O V E R I N G :  S H I P M E N T  O F...M T O N S  O F ... (PRODUCT) 
F O B...D U R I N G  T H E  P E R I O D...O N  M / T “...” 
SPECIAL CONDITIONS 1. CHARTER PARTY BILLS OF LADING ACCEPTABLE. 2. PARTIAL SHIPMENTS AND TRANS-SHIPMENTS NOT PERMITTED. 3. PHOTOCOPIES INSTEAD OF COPY DOCUMENTS ACCEPT
ABLE. 
4. ALL BANK CHARGES AT OPENER’S BANK ARE FOR 
OPENER’S ACCOUNT
. ALL BANK CHARGES AT BENEFI-
CIARY’S BANK ARE FOR BENEFICIARY’S ACCOUNT. 5. TELEX INVOICE AND DULY TESTED TELEX LETTER OF INDEMNITY 
ARE ACCEPTABLE WITH HARD COPY TO 
FOLLOW. 6. THE L/C AMOUNT IS TO FLUCTUATE AUTOMATICALLY ACCORDING TO PRICE CLAUSE WITHOUT FURTHER AMENDMENT FROM OUR P
ART. 
7. IN CASE 1/3 ORIGINAL BILL OF LADING AND/OR ORIGI-NAL “T2L” IS PLACED ON BOARD, THEN THIS IS ACCEPT-ABLE AND DOCUMENTS NO. 2, 3 AND 9 TO EVIDENCE SAME 
AND LETTER OF INDEMNITY TO REFLECT SAME. 
8. DOCUMENTS PRESENTED LATER THAN 21 DAYS AFTER B/L 
DATE ARE ACCEPTABLE. 
9. IF DUE DATE FALLS ON A SUNDAY OR MONDAY NY 
Appendix 13.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 649/964 ---
13 Credit control
BANK WORKING DAY, THEN PAYMENT TO BE MADE ...( T O 
BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONTRACT). THIS CREDIT EXPIRES AT OUR COUNTERS O N... 
WE HEREBY ENGAGE WITH THE BENEFICIARY THAT DOCUMENTS DRA
WN UNDER AND IN STRICT COMPLI-
ANCE WITH THE TERMS OF THIS CREDIT WILL BE DULY HONOURED UPON PRESENT
ATION AS SPECIFIED. 
UPON RECEIPT OF DOCUMENTS STRICTLY IN CONFOR-MITY WITH L/C TERMS WE UNDERTAKE TO COVER YOU AS PER 
YOUR INSTRUCTIONS WITH VALUE 30 CALENDAR 
DAYS AFTER BILL OF LADING SUBJECT TO RECEIPT OF DOCUMENTS LATEST 2 WORKING DAYS PRIOR TO DUE DATE. OTHERWISE PAYMENT WILL BE EFFECTED 2 WORKING DAYS. THIS TELEX IS THE OPERATIVE INSTRUMENT AND WILL NOT BE FOLLOWED BY 
A WRITTEN CONFIRMATION. 
EXCEPT SO FAR AS OTHERWISE EXPRESSLY STATED HEREIN, THIS CREDIT IS SUBJECT TO THE UNIFORM CUSTOMS 
AND PRACTICE FOR DOCUMENTARY CREDITS 
(1983 REVISION) INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COM-MERCE PUBLICATION NUMBER 400. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.3/page 3

--- Page 650/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 651/964 ---
Appendix 13.4	 Sample Letter of 
Indemnity 
TO: BUYER, C/O BUYER’S BANK DATE: RE: SHIPMENT OF XXXXX MT OF NORMAL RUSSIAN GASOIL 
PER MT “ GOOD SHIP LOLLIPOP” / SUB B/L DATED 
IN VENTSPILS COVERED BY DOCCRED NR. XXXXX OF BUYER’S BANK. DEAR SIRS, AL
THOUGH WE, SELLER, SOLD THE ABOVE MENTIONED 
CARGO TO BUYER WE HAVE BEEN UNABLE TO PROVIDE YOU WITH THE ORIGINAL SHIPPING DOCUMENTS INCLUDING 3/3 ORIGINAL CLEAN ON BOARD BILLS OF LADING ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO THE ORDER OF BUYER AS REQUESTED BY DOCCRED NO. XXXXX OF BUYER’S BANK COVERING THE SAID SALE. IN CONSIDERATION OF BUYER’S BANK FOR ACCOUNT OF BUYER P
AYING US FULL PURCHASE PRICE OF US $ XXXXX 
WE HEREBY TRANSFER TITLE TO YOU AND EXPRESSLY WARRANT THAT WE HAVE MARKETABLE TITLE TO SUCH CARGO FREE AND CLEAR OF ANY LIEN OR ENCUM-BRANCE AND THAT WE HAVE THE FULL RIGHT AND AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER SUCH TITLE 
AND TO EFFECT 
DELIVERY OF SUCH MATERIAL TO YOU. WE FURTHER AGREE TO EXERCISE OUR UTMOST EFFORTS TO LOCA
TE AND SURRENDER TO BUYER’S 
BANK FOR ACCOUNT OF BUYER AS SOON AS POSSIBLE THE ORIGINAL SHIPPING DOCUMENTS INCLUDING 3/3 ORIGINAL CLEAN ON BOARD BILLS OF LADING ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO THE ORDER OF BUYER AS REQUESTED BY DOCCRED NR XXXXX OF BUYER’S BANK AND TO PROTECT, INDEMNIFY AND SAVE YOU HARMLESS FROM AND AGAINST ANY AND ALL DAMAGES, COSTS, COUNSEL FEES (INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES) AND ANY OTHER EXPENSES WHICH YOU MAY SUFFER BY REASON OF THE ORIGINAL BILLS OF LADING AND OTHER SHIPPING DOCUMENTS REMAINING OUTSTANDING, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY CLAIMS AND DEMANDS WHICH MAY BE MADE BY A CONSIGNOR, A 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 Appendix 13.4/page 1

--- Page 652/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
HOLDER OR TRANSFEREE OF THE ORIGINAL BILLS OF 
LADING AND OTHER SHIPPING DOCUMENTS, OR BY ANY OTHER THIRD PARTY CLAIMING AN INTEREST IN OR LIEN ON THE CARGO OR PROCEEDS THEREOF. 
THIS LETTER OF INDEMNITY SHALL BE CONSTRUED, INTERPRETED AND GOVERNED BY THE LAWS OF ENGLAND (WITHOUT LIMITATION AS TO ITS FORM CON-TENTS, VALIDITY AND ENFORCEABILITY, BUT WITHOUT REFERENCE TO 
ANY CONFLICT OF LAW RULES). 
THIS LETTER OF INDEMNITY SHALL EXPIRE UPON TEN-DERING TO BUYER’S BANK FOR ACCOUNT OF BUYER THE ORIGINAL 
SHIPPING DOCUMENTS INCLUDING 3/3 ORIGI-
NAL CLEAN ON BOARD BILLS OF LADING ISSUED OR ENDORSED TO THE ORDER OF BUYER 
AS REQUESTED BY 
DOCCRED NR. XXXXX. 
Appendix 13.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 653/964 ---
Appendix 13.5 Sample Letter of 
Intent 
FROM: BUYER TO: SELLER’S BANK COPY: SELLER CONFIRMATION OF PURCHASE BUYER HEREBY CONFIRM TO HAVE PURCHASED FROM SELLER 25000 MT +
/-10 PER CENT NORMAL RUSSIAN 
GASOIL AT A PRICE OF (US DOLLARS) 170 PER METRIC TONNE. DELIVERY TO BE IN 1 FULL OR PART LOT CIF ARA BASED ON CURRENT ETS VENTSPILS ..., ACCORDING TO 
THE TERMS OF THE VERBAL AGREEMENT AS REACHED O N... 
THE AFORESAID AGREEMENT MAY BE SUBJECT TO AMENDMENT BY 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES AT 
ANY TIME AND, ALTHOUGH THE ABOVE STATEMENT IS MADE IN GOOD FAITH, IT SHOULD NOT BE TREATED AS A REPRESENTATION BY US AS TO THE ENFORCEABILITY OF THE AFORESAID AGREEMENT AND IS GIVEN WITHOUT RESPONSIBILITY. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 13.5/page 1

--- Page 654/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 655/964 ---
14 Accounting 
Hanif Barma
Rachel Leigh
Matthew Price
14.1 Introduction
14.2 Accounting guidance
14.3 General principles
14.4 Futures contracts
14.4.1 Accounting for margins
14.4.2 Accounting for commissions
14.4.3 Accounting for hedges
14.4.4 Designation of transactions
14.4.5 Enterprise risk
14.4.6 Effectiveness
14.4.7 Grouping of transactions
14.4.8 Anticipated transactions
14.4.9 Early termination of hedges
14.4.10 Valuation issues
14.4.11 Documentation
14.5 Forward contracts
14.5.1 Accounting guidance
14.5.2 Accounting on a net basis
14.6 Swaps
14.6.1 Average price instruments
14.6.2 Floors, caps and range forwards
14.6.3 Participation hedge
14.6.4 Swaps contracts and accounting periods
14.6.5 Requirements for hedge accounting
14.7 Options
14.7.1 Effectiveness
14.7.2 Proﬁt recognition
14.7.3 Commissions and margin payments
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 656/964 ---
14.8 Physical hedges 
14.8.1 Deﬁnitions 
14.8.2 FAS 133 
14.8.3 Speculative inventories 
14.9 Disclosure requirements 
14.9.1 United States 
14.9.2 United Kingdom 
14.10 Conclusions
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 657/964 ---
14.1 Introduction 
An enterprise may enter into oil trading activities for a number of reasons. Oil companies engaged in the exploration and pro-duction of oil may wish to secure prices to be obtained from future production. 
A reﬁner may wish to secure prices to be paid in the 
future for reﬁnery feedstock purchases or proceeds from future production. Other companies may be active in the market with different motives – traders may take positions in the market to make a proﬁt. The position they take will clearly depend on the trader’s or speculator’s expectations of future price movements. 
In the case of the producer or reﬁner, the motive for the 
transaction is essentially precautionary with oil trading activity principally carried out as a hedge. In the case of the trader
, the 
proﬁt motive underlying dealings indicates that the transaction is speculative. The accounting treatment adopted for oil trading activities will depend on the nature of the transaction. In partic-ular, proﬁt recognition will be affected by whether a transaction is entered into as a hedge or for speculation. 
In this chapter, we review the principal aspects of account-
ing for oil related products. It will consider accounting guidance available in the form of accounting standards and industry best practice. The accounting treatment applicable to all the major oil trading products or instruments – forwards, futures, swaps, options and physical hedges – will also be considered in turn illus-trated by detailed examples. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.1/page 1

--- Page 658/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 659/964 ---
14.2 Accounting guidance 
The development of oil related trading instruments, like that for ﬁnancial instruments, has been rapid, with various new and complex instruments having been developed in response to a per-ceived need. As a result of this fast changing environment, little authoritative guidance has been developed in the United Kingdom. 
Accounting practice for the industry has therefore 
drawn upon guidance from the United States. 
The primary source of authoritative guidance in the US is 
drawn from Financial 
Accounting Standard (FAS) 133 Account­
ing for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities , issued by 
the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) in 1998 and by FAS 138 Accounting for Certain Derivative Instruments and 
Certain Hedging Activities, an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 133 issued in 2000. FAS 133 applies to all entities following 
US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and to all instruments it deﬁnes as derivatives. FAS 133 supersedes FAS 80, 105 and 119 and amends FAS 107 to make it consistent with FAS 133’s measurement provisions. In the UK, brief reference is made to oil trading activities in the Oil Industry Accounting Committee’s Statement of Recommended Practice (No.4), Accounting for Various Financing, Revenue and Other Transac­tions of Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Companies . In 
addition, guidance may be drawn from the Statement of Recom-mended Accounting Practice (SORP) on Off-Balance Sheet Instru­
ments and Other Commitments and Contingent Liabilities . 
Although issued for the banking industry
, useful reference can be 
made to the SORP. 
The accounting principles discussed in this chapter are 
drawn from the above sources where applicable. However
, as a 
result of the lack of authoritative guidance in the UK, it is pos-sible for two enterprises in similar circumstances to account for a transaction involving an oil related commodity or instrument differently
, giving rise to differing reported results. This poten-
tial divergence demonstrates the need for adequate disclosure of accounting policies and the nature of transactions in the enter-prise’
s ﬁnancial statements. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.2/page 1

--- Page 660/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 661/964 ---
14.3 General principles 
In order to apply the principles of hedge accounting, under both UK and US GAAP, a number of criteria should apply: 
•	The futures transaction must be designated as a hedge of an existing asset, liability or ﬁrm commitment, or a speciﬁc anticipated transaction. 
•	The relationship between the hedge and the hedged item must be highly effective in achieving the offset of changes in those fair values or cash ﬂows that are attributable to the hedged risk. 
Under UK GAAP, if the conditions for hedge accounting are ful-ﬁlled, then changes in the market value of the hedging instru-ment are not accounted for immediately in the proﬁt and loss account. Rather
, any gains or losses are deferred in the enter-
prise’s balance sheet (normally as an adjustment to the carrying value of the item being hedged). These are recognised and included in the proﬁt and loss account on the realisation of the underlying hedged item or transaction. However, under US GAAP (FAS 133) the accounting treatment for items designated as hedges is rather more detailed and is discussed in more depth in the rest of this chapter. For example, a fair value hedge under FAS 133 changes in the market value of the hedging instrument are accounted for immediately in the proﬁt and loss account and offset the changes in the market value of the hedged item. 
If the item being hedged is accounted for at market value 
the hedge instrument itself is also accounted for at fair value and the gains and losses of the hedged item and the hedging instru-ment are offset within the proﬁt and loss account. 
Where any of the two criteria mentioned above do not apply, 
then the instrument concerned is accounted for at market value. Marking to market implies that changes in the market value of the instrument are accounted for immediately in the enterprise’
s 
proﬁt and loss account. All speculative transactions are conse-quently accounted for on the mark to market principle. Marking to market will result in the setting up of a pre-payment or accrual, as appropriate, in the balance sheet. 
Under FAS 133, reference is made to a number of different 
types of hedge, which can be described as follows: 
•	Fair-value hedge – a hedge of the exposure to changes (that are attributable to a particular risk) in the fair 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.3/page 1

--- Page 662/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
value of a recognised asset or liability or an unrecog -
nised ﬁrm commitment. 
•	Cash-ﬂow hedge – a hedge of the exposure to variabil-
ity (that is attributable to a particular risk) in the cash ﬂows of a recognised asset or liability or a forecasted transaction. 
FAS 133 also refers to foreign-currency hedges, although this chapter makes reference to fair
-value and cash ﬂow hedges only. 
14.3/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 663/964 ---
14.4 Futures contracts 
A futures contract is a contractual agreement between a buyer and seller, traded on a regulated exchange, to accept or take delivery of a standardised quantity of a speciﬁed grade or type of commodity at a speciﬁed date in the future. Futures also provide for cash settlement as an alternative to delivery. 14.4.1 Accounting for margins 
One of the major characteristics of the futures market is the regular – often daily – cash settlement to reﬂect changes in the market value of an instrument. T
ypically, on execution of the 
futures contract, an initial margin is paid over to the broker in the form of cash. This initial margin simply represents a deposit. As a consequence, the payment of an initial margin should be reﬂected in an enterprise’s balance sheet as a debtor and not as an expense or cost to the enterprise. For example, the payment of an initial margin of $10,000 to a broker would be reﬂected: Dr Debtors – margin account $10,000 Cr 
Cash $10,000 
In addition to initial margins, the enterprise will be involved 
in making daily cash settlements to the broker
. These variation 
margins (which are based on the closing prices of the contract) represent adjustments to the deposits held by the broker. These daily settlements, which can result in an additional margin payment to the broker or in cash refunds from the broker are accounted for in the same way as the initial margin. 
Margin deposits should not be included in reported cash bal-
ances. Nor should they be incorporated in the cost or carrying amount of the hedged asset or liability
. Instead, margin deposits 
should be included within debtors in the enterprise’s balance sheet. 14.4.2 Accounting for commissions 
Apart from payments to brokers in the form of margins, com-missions will normally be paid to brokers. Such commissions will need to be identiﬁed separately from margin payments and expensed separately in the proﬁt and loss accounts. 
In practice, commissions may be deducted from any remain-
ing margin deposit prior to the margin being reimbursed by the broker to the enterprise. Regardless of the timing of payment, the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.4/page 1

--- Page 664/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
commissions represent a transactional cost and should be 
expensed on execution of a futures contract. The accounting entries required on entering a futures contract would be: 
Dr Proﬁt and loss account $x 
Cr Creditors – commissions payable $x 
On settlement of the commission (possibly by offset against margin deposits) the accounting entries required would be: Dr Creditors – commissions payable $x Cr 
Cash (or debtors – margin deposit) $x 
14.4.3 Accounting for hedges 
The accounting for the futures contract under consideration will be dependent on whether the contract is treated as a trade or a hedge. If it is treated as a hedge, gains or losses on the hedge should not be recognised in the proﬁt and loss account of the period in which the price change takes place, but deferred and included in the proﬁt and loss account in the period during which the underlying transaction matures or the hedged asset (liability) is realised (crystallises). 
For example, where a crude oil producer enters into a futures 
contract in January for July delivery
, proﬁts and losses on the 
contract would be deferred until July when production of the expected quantity of crude oil is produced and sold. The gain or loss on the futures contract would be included within oil and gas revenues or turnover in July. The gain or loss would not be clas-siﬁed below the gross proﬁt line in the proﬁt and loss account. In practice, under UK GAAP
, there is no need for any balance sheet 
recognition of the hedging instrument in January because the hedge relates to a future production stream. 
Similarly, where the hedge is for an existing asset or liabil-
ity of the enterprise, gains or losses on the futures contract are deferred in the same manner
. No accounting entries affecting the 
balance sheet or proﬁt and loss account are required until the asset is sold or the liability crystallises. For example, if a futures contract executed in June for the sale of gasoil (for November delivery) hedges physical gasoil stock which is not expected to be sold until the winter, unrealised gains or losses are not initially reﬂected. The gain or loss arising when the futures contract is closed out in November is included within sales revenues in the proﬁt and loss account in November. It should be noted that if the stock is written down below cost to net realisable value in 
14.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 665/964 ---
14 Accounting
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, part of the proﬁt on the futures contract must be recognised to the extent of the loss on the physical stock. 
An alternative approach is to recognise an asset, or liability 
in respect of the gain or loss, with a corresponding adjustment to the underlying hedged asset or liability
. This treatment is typi-
cally adopted where the underlying hedged asset or liability is accounted for at market value. Until maturity
, the gains or losses 
on revaluation will also be included in the enterprise’s balance sheet as such within debtors or creditors and will not be reﬂected in the proﬁt and loss account (except for those hedges treated under FAS 133 where the gains or losses on revaluation are recog-nised in the proﬁt and loss account immediately and used to offset against the gains and losses on revaluation of the hedged item). Unrealised gains and losses should not normally be offset against initial margins included within debtors. In addition, the deferred gains or losses should be classiﬁed appropriately as long term or short term, consistent with the expected timing of recognition of the hedged sale. 
In order to qualify for hedge accounting, the futures contract 
must satisfy certain criteria: 
•	designation as a hedge, 
•	reduction of enterprise risk (not required under FAS 133), 
•	an adequate degree of effectiveness. 
These criteria are considered individually in more detail below. Where any of these criteria are not fulﬁlled at inception, the futures contract will be regarded as speculative and should be marked to market. Gains and losses in this case are recognised immediately in the proﬁt and loss accounts. 
The use of futures contracts as a hedge can be illustrated by 
way of example. 
Assume that on 1 January, an enterprise enters 
into 50 IPE Brent crude oil futures contracts for the sale of 1,000 barrels each (total 50,000 barrels) for 31 March delivery at a price of $20 per barrel. The enterprise has entered into the contract to hedge March production. Its broker requires an initial margin of $150,000 and commission of $1,000 to be paid. The accounting entries required on initiation of the futures contract are as follows: Dr Proﬁt and loss account 
– commissions payable $1,000 
Cr 
Cash $1,000 
(to reﬂect payment of broker’s commission) 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.4/page 3

--- Page 666/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Dr Debtors – margin account $150,000 
Cr Cash $150,000 
(to reﬂect payment of the initial margin) 
On 31 January, the price of a futures contract for 31 March deliv-ery is $22 per barrel and the broker imposes a margin require-ment as follows: 
Case 1: 100 per cent cash requirement for the change in the 
price per barrel 
Case 2: 20 per cent cash requirement for the change in the 
price per barrel In the ﬁrst case, the additional margin payable to the broker is a further $100,000 ($2 ¥ 50,000 barrels). The following account-
ing entry will be made at 31 January: Dr Debtors – margin account $100,000 Cr 
Cash $100,000 
(to reﬂect the payment of the variation margin), Dr Other assets – deferred loss 
on futures contracts $100,000 
Cr 
Debtors – margin account $100,000 
(to reﬂect the reclassiﬁcation of the constituent parts of the margin account). Both the margin account ($150,000) and the deferred loss on futures contracts ($100,000) will be shown as current assets in the company’
s balance sheet at 31 January. 
If the enterprise had entered into the contract for specula-
tive purposes, the accounting entries at 31 January would have been as follows: Dr Debtors – margin account $100,000 Cr 
Cash $100,000 
(to reﬂect the payment of the variation margin) Dr Proﬁt and loss account 
– losses on futures contracts $100,000 
Cr 
Debtors – margin account $100,000 
(to reﬂect the marking to market of the futures contracts) At this date, the balance sheet would include only the initial margin within debtors. 
In the second case the additional margin payable to the 
broker is $20,000 (20 per cent ¥ $2 ¥ 50,000 barrels). The fol-
lowing accounting entries will be made at 31 January: 
14.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 667/964 ---
14 Accounting
Dr Debtors – margin account $20,000 Cr Cash $20,000 
(to reﬂect the payment of the variation margin), Dr Other assets – deferred loss 
on futures contracts $100,000 
Cr 
Debtors – margin account $100,000 
(to reﬂect the funded and unfunded deferred loss). The enterprise’s balance sheet at 31 January will need to reﬂect the unfunded liability arising on revaluation of the futures con-tract although this loss is deferred until maturity of the contract, on 31 March. However
, if there is a right to offset, the margin 
account and unfunded liability can be disclosed net in the balance sheet. If unfunded liabilities exceeded the initial margin, a net creditor would arise. 
If the contract had been speculative in nature, or failed to 
meet the criteria for hedge accounting to apply
, the following 
entries would have been made: Dr Debtors – margin account $20,000 Cr 
Cash $20,000 
(to reﬂect the payment of the variation margin), Dr Proﬁt and loss account 
– losses on futures contracts $100,000 
Cr 
Debtors – margin account $100,000 
(to reﬂect the marking to market of the futures contracts). 14.4.4 Designation of transactions 
In order for a futures contract to qualify as a hedge, the contract must be designated as a hedge at its inception. Designation demonstrates management intent in relation to the rationale for entering into a futures contract. In the absence of such designa-tion, the contract should be deemed to be speculative for the pur-poses of accounting and is then accounted for on a mark to market basis. 
Suitable backing documentation will need to be maintained 
by the enterprise to indicate which contracts that have been entered into are hedges, and indeed, which assets, liabilities, committed or anticipated transactions they are hedging. (This may be an onerous requirement and an enterprise wishing to reduce the operational burden involved with hedge accounting may decide to decline to designate its transactions as hedges, 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.4/page 5

--- Page 668/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
even where they operate as such, and mark to market instead. 
This will, however, not necessarily result in reported results reﬂecting the true nature of the underlying transactions.) 
The supporting accounting controls should be robust enough 
to prevent manipulation of reported results by the re-designation of contracts from hedges to speculative transactions or vice-versa. Clearly, re-designation can have a potentially signiﬁcant effect on the reported results of an enterprise through the deferral or acceleration of the timing of recognition of proﬁts and losses. A contract should be designated as a hedge or as speculative on exe-cution and maintained as such during the life of the contract. Cir-cumstances such as lack of effectiveness may, however, dictate re-designation. Where this is frequently the case, the validity and appropriateness of hedge accounting is called into question. 14.4.5 Enterprise risk 
Prior to the introduction of FAS 133, one of the criteria to be ful-ﬁlled, in order for a futures contract to be accounted for as a hedge, was that the item to be hedged must have exposed the enterprise to price risk. The hedge itself then needed to demon-strate a reduction in that price risk. Under FAS 133, the demon-stration of enterprise or transaction risk reduction is not required – only the demonstration of a high effectiveness of offset in changes in the fair value or cash ﬂows of the hedging instrument and the hedged item. High effectiveness is discussed further below
. 
14.4.6 Effectiveness 
A further condition to be fulﬁlled under FAS 133, in order for hedge accounting to apply
, is that the hedging relationship 
between the hedging instrument and the hedged item must be highly effective in achieving the offset of changes in those fair values or cash ﬂows that are attributable to the hedged risk, both at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis. An assess-ment of this effectiveness is required at least every 3 months and whenever ﬁnancial statements or earnings are reported by an enterprise. 
The high-effectiveness requirement has been interpreted in 
practice, and by the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), to mean that cumulative changes in the value of the hedging instru-ment should be between 80 per cent and 125 per cent of the inverse cumulative changes in the fair value or cash ﬂows of the hedged item. 
14.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 669/964 ---
14 Accounting
FAS 133 requires that an enterprise, as part of its designa-
tion of a hedging relationship, deﬁne up front how it will assess a hedge’
s effectiveness in achieving the offset of changes in fair 
value or the offset of cash ﬂows that are attributable to the risk that is being hedged. In this regard, FAS 133 requires that, throughout the hedge period, an enterprise consistently use a deﬁned method to: 
•	assess whether it expects the hedging relationship to be highly effective in achieving offset; and 
•	measure the ineffective part of the hedge. 
FAS 133 does not limit an enterprise to specifying a single method to achieve the above objectives but does, however
, require 
that the method of assessing effectiveness be reasonable and that the same method be used for similar hedges, unless different methods are justiﬁed explicitly. 
FAS 133 requires that an enterprise specify initially whether 
it will include all or only a portion (i.e. a speciﬁed percentage) of the gain or loss or cash ﬂows on a hedging instrument in its assessment of hedge effectiveness. F
AS 133 permits an enterprise 
to exclude a component of the hedging instrument’s gain or loss or cash ﬂows from the assessment of hedge effectiveness only in certain circumstances, for example, if the effectiveness of a hedge with a forward or futures contract is assessed based on changes in the fair value attributable to changes in spot prices, the change in the fair value of the contract related to the changes in the dif-ference between the spot price and the forward or futures price would be excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness. 
In the case above, changes in the fair value of the excluded 
component would be included currently in earnings, together with any ineffectiveness that results under the enterprise’
s 
deﬁned method of assessing effectiveness. Except for the three circumstances described above, enterprises are not permitted to exclude components of a hedging instrument’s gain or loss from the assessment of hedge effectiveness. 
An example of how an oil producer may assess hedge effec-
tiveness would be to compare the entire change in fair value of a futures contract to the total price changes in oil stocks held. This would be in lieu of assessing the hedge effectiveness based on changes in only the “spot” component of the futures contract and the oil inventory
. 
Even though hedging relationships may be highly effective, 
in many cases the effectiveness will not be perfect, that is, the gains and losses on the hedging instrument will not be offset 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.4/page 7

--- Page 670/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
perfectly by the losses and gains on the hedged item. It is worth 
noting, however, that high effectiveness does not guarantee that there will be no earnings volatility resulting from hedge ineffectiveness. 
Where the hedge is highly effective but not perfectly effec-
tive, there will be some volatility in earnings due to the ineffec-tive portion of the hedge. This is because FAS 133 requires that the ineffective portion of the hedge be recorded in earnings. For example, an oil producer uses a futures contract as a fair value hedge for a holding of crude oil stock. If the future’
s fair value 
decreases by $10,000 but the stock’s value increases by $8,000, a net loss of $2,000 will result when gains and losses on both the future and the stock are recorded in earnings as required by FAS 133. 14.4.7 Grouping of transactions 
Apart from hedging individual assets, liabilities or transactions, it is permissible for an enterprise to group a number of like items and to designate a futures contract or a number of futures con-tracts as a hedge of the group of items. For example, an enter-prise with stocks of different grades of crude may execute a single futures contract as a hedge. However
, where the underlying items 
are dissimilar – such as stocks of crude and a range of product stocks – it is unlikely that it will be appropriate to group such stocks to be hedged by a single type of futures contract as ade-quate effectiveness may not be achieved. 
By corollary, it would also be acceptable to group a series of 
futures contracts and designate this group of contracts as a hedge against an underlying asset, liability or transaction (or indeed, group of items). 
An enterprise may decide on this method of 
hedging where there is no single traded contract with an appro-priate maturity to serve as a hedge. 
An organisation may also elect to hedge a net inventory posi-
tion. In this case, the enterprise will need to keep particularly detailed records in order to identify the amortisation or recogni-tion of gains or losses on the relevant futures contract or con-tracts. The basis of amortisation must produce reasonable and sensible results and will be based normally on the enterprise’
s 
rate of inventory turnover. 
FAS 133 permits portfolio hedging where the individual 
assets and liabilities share the risk exposure for which they are designated as being a hedge. However
, there must be an expec-
tation, both at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis, that the fair value of each individual item in the portfolio will 
14.4/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 671/964 ---
14 Accounting
change proportionately to the change in the fair value of the entire portfolio for the hedged risk. For example, if the fair value of a portfolio of stocks was to increase by 10 per cent, the fair value of each component of stock should increase within a narrow range of 9 per cent to 11 per cent. 14.4.8 Anticipated transactions 
Apart from hedging actual or existing assets, liabilities or con-tracted transactions, an enterprise may decide to hedge an antic-ipated transaction. In order for hedge accounting to apply to an anticipated transaction, two other criteria need to be met (in addition to the usual requirements of designation, enterprise risk and adequate effectiveness): 
•	the signiﬁcant terms and characteristics of the antici-pated transaction need to be capable of being identi-ﬁed, and 
•	it must be probable that the anticipated transaction will occur
. 
The signiﬁcant terms and characteristics of the anticipated trans-action would normally include the transaction date, the type or quality of the commodity involved and the expected quantity of the commodity to be bought or sold. For example, an oil producer will normally have a clear idea of the expected quality or grade of crude to be sold from one of its ﬁelds. It will normally have a ﬁrm idea of production or lifting dates and quantities (subject to unforeseen shutdowns), at least in the short term. Consequently
, 
the producer will be in a position to hedge part or all of a future month’s production using futures contracts and hedge accounting could be applied in such circumstances. 
The likelihood that an anticipated transaction will materi-
alise should be based on observable factors rather than merely considering management intent. These factors are likely to include: 
•	the frequency of similar transactions in the past, 
•	the length of time until the anticipated transaction is due to arise, 
•	the effect on the enterprise should the anticipated transaction not occur
, 
•	the availability of alternative transactions or courses of action available to the enterprise, and 
•	the ﬁnancial position of the enterprise and its ability to carry out the transactions. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.4/page 9

--- Page 672/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
If it becomes probable that, during the life of the hedge, the quan -
tity of the anticipated transaction will be less than the quantity hedged originally, the deferred gain or loss should be prorated and an appropriate portion recognised immediately in the proﬁt and loss account. The remaining gain or loss should continue to be deferred and recognised when the underlying transaction occurs. If it becomes probable that the quantity of the anticipated transaction will be greater than that hedged originally, hedge accounting remains unaffected as the hedge merely becomes a hedge of part of the anticipated transaction. 
In addition to the above, a requirement of FAS 133 is that 
hedged anticipated transactions must be described with sufﬁci-ent speciﬁcity such that, when a transaction occurs, it is clear whether that transaction is or is not the hedged transaction. For example, an enterprise that expects to sell at least 300,000 barrels of crude oil in its next ﬁscal quarter might designate the sales of the ﬁrst 100,000 barrels in each month as the hedged transactions. It could not, however
, simply designate any sales of 
300,000 barrels during the quarter as the hedged transaction because it then would be impossible to determine whether the ﬁrst sales transaction of the quarter was a hedged transaction. Similarly, an entity could not designate the last 300,000 sales of the quarter as the hedged transaction because it would not be possible to determine whether sales early in the quarter were hedged or not. 14.4.9 Early termination of hedges 
The termination of a hedge will arise from the disposal of the underlying asset or crystallisation of the underlying liability
. It 
will also terminate when the underlying ﬁrm commitment or anticipated transaction arises. However, a hedge may also be ter-minated early. It is important to understand the circumstances surrounding early termination since this will affect the account-ing treatment adopted. Early termination may result from: 
• a discretionary decision by management, and 
• absence of effectiveness. 
Management may decide on the early termination of a hedge and close out a futures contract by executing an equal but opposite contract to that designated originally as a hedge. This may be done even where the underlying asset (or liability) has not been sold (or crystallised) or where the committed or anticipated trans-action has not yet occurred. Where this arises, the gain or loss 
14.4/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 673/964 ---
14 Accounting
on the futures contract should continue to be deferred until the underlying transaction occurs and included within the gain or loss on the underlying transaction itself. Management should not terminate hedges selectively and recognise proﬁts and losses at their discretion as this could be taken to be an indication of spec-ulative activity. Where the underlying item being hedged is an asset or a liability
, the gain or loss on an early terminated hedge 
will simply be included within the carrying amount of the asset or liability. 
On the other hand, where high effectiveness ceases to exist, 
previously deferred gains and losses should be recognised in the proﬁt and loss account, but only to the extent that they have not been offset by changes in value of the item being hedged. Deferred gains and losses that have been offset by changes in value of the hedged item continue to be deferred. In spite of the lack of expected future effectiveness, management may decide not to close out the futures contract; as such, it becomes a spec-ulative contract and is thereafter accounted for on a mark to market basis. 
Signiﬁcant changes in an enterprise’s hedging strategy may 
raise the possibility that the requirement of high effectiveness has not been satisﬁed, or that it is not expected to continue in the future. Changes may reﬂect simply a change in management intent as to the exposure to price changes being hedged – there is no requirement to hedge a position or exposure completely
. In 
order to account for futures transactions properly, the account-ant should therefore have a clear understanding of the enter-prise’
s hedging strategy. 
A situation where hedge management is achieved through 
the repeated designation and re-designation of futures contracts as hedges or speculative contracts (rather than actually closing out contracts) would not be acceptable for hedge accounting. 14.4.10 Valuation issues 
Although stringent criteria need to apply to permit hedge accounting, an issue common to both hedge accounting and accounting for speculative contracts is the valuation of the futures contracts. The latter requires valuation of the contract at market value at each period end for proﬁt recognition purposes. The former requires valuation in order to determine the gain or loss to be deferred and included as part of the carrying amount of the underlying asset or liability that is being hedged. 
Generally, determining the market value of a futures con-
tract is not a problem as the contract will be traded on a 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.4/page 11

--- Page 674/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
recognised exchange. Most exchanges, however , impose daily 
limits on permitted price movements to attempt to ensure an orderly market. Unanticipated events, such as the commence
-
ment of the Gulf crisis with the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990, can result in the prices of futures contracts reaching the price cap or ﬂoor
. Where this happens trading may temporarily cease and 
determining period end prices may be difﬁcult if trading strad-dles the year end. In such cases, other sources may provide a more suitable basis for valuation. 14.4.11 Documentation 
An enterprise engaging in signiﬁcant futures hedging activity will, apart from maintaining adequate systems of control, need to maintain adequate documentation to support its hedging activ-ity. This is required to demonstrate: 
•	the contracts as hedges, 
•	the mitigation of enterprise risk (not required under F
AS 133), and 
•	an adequate level of effectiveness (which should be monitored on an ongoing basis). 
Additionally, further documentation should be maintained where anticipated transactions are to be hedged to ensure that hedge accounting is suitable for such transactions – all this must be maintained in addition to that information required to record and monitor the underlying futures contracts themselves (which would also be required where the contracts are speculative). 
Compared to pre-FAS 133 requirements, FAS 133 increases 
the requirements in terms of the degree of documentation and the quality of hedge effectiveness analysis that is necessary in order for a hedge relationship to qualify for hedge accounting. Since F
AS 133’s model does not require a speciﬁc type of test for 
hedge effectiveness, or that an enterprise use a speciﬁc hedge strategy for a particular type of hedge transaction, it places more emphasis on the documentation of an enterprise’s approach to risk management. As a result, the hedge documentation must include, at a minimum: 
•	an identiﬁcation of the hedging instrument, the hedged item and the nature of the risk that is being hedged; 
•	a description of how the hedging instrument’s effec-tiveness in offsetting the exposure to changes in the 
14.4/page 12	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 675/964 ---
14 Accounting
hedged item’s fair value or cash ﬂows that are attrib-utable to the hedged risk will be assessed (must include an indication of whether all of the gain or loss on the derivative hedging instrument will be included in the assessment and must have a reasonable basis); 
•	a speciﬁcation of the enterprise’s intent for under -
taking the hedge (for example, its risk management strategy); and 
•	evidence that, at the hedge’s inception and on an ongoing basis, it is expected that the hedging rela-tionship will be highly effective in achieving offset-ting changes in the fair value or cash ﬂows that are attributable to the hedged risk. 
Clearly, hedge accounting potentially requires signiﬁcantly more documentation and paperwork than where an enterprise simply marks to market. This is also a potentially onerous commitment or obligation, particularly for smaller enterprises. 
An enterprise 
may decide to account for all its futures contracts as speculative – by not designating them as hedges – thereby reducing theextent of the back ofﬁce responsibilities. However
, the impact of 
this approach on reported results will clearly need to be consid-ered properly. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.4/page 13

--- Page 676/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 677/964 ---
14.5 Forward contracts 
Forward contracts are contracts to buy or sell a speciﬁed quan-tity of a commodity for delivery at a particular time and place in the future. Unlike futures contracts, forwards are not traded on regulated exchanges. Such contracts may simply be a supply agreement between a reﬁner and purchaser of reﬁned products to cover the purchaser
’s requirements for a period of time, such 
as for the next 12 months. In another situation, a non-operator with a small stake in a producing ﬁeld may have an agreement to sell its share of production forward to the operator at a ﬁxed price. Although these 2 examples illustrate forward contracts, they do not come within the scope of oil trading transactions being considered here. Forwards in this context normally refer to paper deals where physical delivery is not necessarily expected to result: such as trading on the 15-day Brent market. 14.5.1 Accounting guidance 
There is no authoritative guidance for accounting for forward trading. However
, the accounting rules which apply to account-
ing for futures trading also apply generally to forwards. Forward transactions may be entered into as hedges (of underlying assets, liabilities or transactions) or for speculative reasons. In order for hedge accounting to apply
, the criteria discussed above relating 
to futures should also be met, namely: 
•	designation of the transaction as a hedge, 
•	mitigation of enterprise risk (not required under FAS 133), 
•	adequate degree of effectiveness. 
Where all these criteria are met, the gains or losses on the forward contracts should be deferred and recognised in the proﬁt and loss account in the period in which the hedged asset (or lia-bility) is realised (or crystallises) or the hedged transaction occurs. However
, where any of the criteria are not met, the 
forward contract should be regarded as speculative and price changes accounted for in the period in which the price change occurs by marking to market. 14.5.2 Accounting on a net basis 
An issue which arises in relation to forward trading which does not arise in relation to futures contracts is whether to account for 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.5/page 1

--- Page 678/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
the transactions on a gross basis (as part of sales and cost of 
sales) or whether to account for the net proﬁt or loss as part of other operating income or turnover. 
Although there are arguments for recording forward sales 
and purchases that are undertaken as part of an enterprise’s oil trading activities as part of turnover and cost of sales respectively where oil trading is not the principal activity of the enterprise (for example, an oil producer or reﬁner), the most appropriate basis is to account for such transactions net. To do otherwise would potentially distort turnover as a measure of the level of activity of the enterprise and distort any meaningful comparisons that could otherwise be drawn from the enterprise’s gross margin. 
Accounting for forward transactions is best illustrated by 
way of example. 
Assume an oil producer’s next lifting of 500,000 
barrels is due in 3 months’ time, in April. To hedge this produc-tion, it sells 500,000 barrels forward on the 15-day Brent market at $20 per barrel. In March, it closes out the forward contract by purchasing 500,000 barrels forward (April delivery) for $22 per barrel. Its lifting in 
April is also subsequently sold, at market 
prices, for $22 per barrel. The accounting entries during the period would be: Dr Debtors $10,000,000 
Cr 
Forward sales $10,000,000 
(To record the forward sale in January), Dr Forward purchases $11,000,000 Cr 
Creditors $11,000,000 
(To record the closing out of the original forward contract), Dr Debtors $11,000,000 
Cr Proﬁt and loss account 
– turnover $11,000,000 
(To record the sale of the April lifting), Dr Proﬁt and loss account 
– turnover $1,000,000 
Dr 
Forward sales $10,000,000 
Cr Forward purchases $11,000,000 
(to reﬂect the recognition of the gain or loss on the hedge). Except where indicated, the above entries relate to balance sheet accounts. 
If the forward transactions were recorded gross, the enter-
prise’
s turnover is shown as $21 million, notwithstanding the 
14.5/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 679/964 ---
14 Accounting
single lifting of 500,000 barrels. By recording forward purchases and sales net, turnover for the period shown is $11 million with a net loss on forward trading of $1 million. As the transaction was undertaken as a hedge, this would be offset against turnover to result in net turnover disclosed of $10 million. 
If the enterprise entered into the forward transactions for 
speculative purposes, the $1 million loss on the trading transac-tions would not be offset against turnover but shown as other operating income/expense after the gross proﬁt line. 
Where an enterprise is long or short in forward transactions 
at the end of an accounting period, the forward transactions should be revalued at the period end. If the transactions are hedges, the gain or loss would be deferred and carried forward in the balance sheet as a deferred asset or deferred liability as appropriate. If speculative, gains or losses would be included within other operating income/expense in the proﬁt and loss account. 
Where forward trades are not strictly paper trades, but 
trades in physical cargoes, arguments can be framed for these trades to be accounted for on a gross basis. For gross accounting there should be a clearly identiﬁable cargo and legal title to the cargo should pass upon the trade. 
Additionally, settlement of the 
trade should be for the gross value of the transaction traded. Whichever basis is adopted, however, the accounting policy should be disclosed clearly to enable a proper understanding of the ﬁnancial statements. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.5/page 3

--- Page 680/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 681/964 ---
14.6 Swaps 
Unlike futures and forward contracts, which are frequently-traded commodity-backed instruments, swaps are a form of deriv-ative instrument which are not traded on a “market”. Generally, these are contracts entered into by an enterprise with a ﬁnancial intermediary such as a bank, for the same motives as the enter-prise enters into futures or forward contracts; either as hedges or for speculative reasons. Swaps can also be tailor
-made to suit 
the enterprise’s speciﬁc requirements and can provide hedges with a high degree of risk mitigation. 
A swap exchanges an income stream that the enterprise 
would normally face, for another devised by the ﬁnancial inter-mediary or bank. For example, an oil producer facing volatility in its income stream as a result of selling its production on the spot market may enter into a swap contract with a bank, exchanging its production for a ﬁxed price. The bank therefore takes on the exposure to price ﬂuctuation. However
, the bank 
may be able to offset part or all of this exposure by entering into another swap with a reﬁner who faces price volatility in his cost of sales: crude oil purchases. As the nature and terms of one swap instrument may vary from another the accounting treatment will also vary. However, there are a number of basic swap instruments to consider: 
• average price or basic swaps, 
• ﬂoors, 
• ceilings/caps, 
• range forwards, 
• participation hedges. 
The accounting treatments for these instruments are considered by way of example. 14.6.1 Average price instruments 
An oil producer enters into a swap of 100,000 barrels of crude per month with a ﬁnancial intermediary at $20 per barrel for a 12 month period. The producer is expected to produce at least this quantity of crude per month. In practice it sells its production on the spot market. 
At the end of each month settlement takes place 
with the bank. This settlement will be deﬁned by reference to a published source (such as Platt’s , or prices quoted in the Finan­
cial Times ). If the average price of crude exceeds $20 per barrel, 
a payment will be made by the producer to the bank. If the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.6/page 1

--- Page 682/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
average price of crude is below $20 per barrel, a top-up payment 
will be made by the bank to the producer. 
If the average price of Brent crude for the month is $22 per 
barrel, the accounting entries required will be as follows: 
Dr Cash $2,200,000 
Cr Turnover – crude oil sales $2,200,000 
(to reﬂect the sale of its production on the spot market, the pro-ducer having received $2,200,000, i.e. 100,000 barrels at $22 per barrel), Dr Turnover – crude oil sales $200,000 Cr 
Cash $200,000 
(to reﬂect a payment of $200,000 by the producer to the bank, i.e. 100,000 barrels at $2 per barrel). 
The net effect of these two entries will be to include $2 
million in the producer 
’s proﬁt and loss account as turnover. In 
essence, the enterprise has fully hedged its production. 
If the average price of Brent crude is $19 per barrel the 
following accounting entries would be made: Dr Cash $1,900,000 
Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $1,900,000 
(to reﬂect the sale of crude production on the spot market), Dr Cash $100,000 
Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $100,000 
(to reﬂect the payment by the bank to the producer). The net result of these entries would also be to include $2 million in turnover
. 
In the above example, no initial payment was made by either 
party
. If an initial payment of $12,000 had been made by the oil 
producer to the bank, this would be amortised over the life of the contract as follows: Dr Debtors – prepaid commissions $12,000 Cr 
Cash $12,000 
(to reﬂect the initial payment made on entering into the swap). 
At the end of each month, 1/12 of this would be amortised: 
Dr Turnover – crude oil sales $1,000 Cr 
Debtors – prepaid commissions $1,000 
14.6/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 683/964 ---
14 Accounting
As an alternative, the debit entry may be made to other oper-
ating expenses. If production is expected to vary each month, the amortisation should be calculated on a unit of production basis. In the case of futures transactions, the preferred treatment dis-cussed in Section 14.4.2 above was to expense such costs as trans-actional costs. In the case of swaps such as those described here, amortisation of the up-front payment is acceptable as the swap can be viewed as a series of transactions that are being hedged. Normally
, futures contracts are used to hedge only a single trans-
action. In the above example, the enterprise entered into the swap as a hedge. 
An identical contract could, of course, be entered 
into by a non-producer of oil. 
In this case, the transaction would be speculative and the 
only entry required at the end of each month would be: Dr Cash $x 
Cr 
Other operating income $x 
with cash received from the bank where the average price falls short of the swap price, or Dr Other operating income $x Cr 
Cash $x 
with the cash payment made to the bank where the average price exceeds the swap price. 
Where a transaction is speculative, the bank may perceive 
that it faces a different level of credit risks, with the result that the terms of the swap may vary 
. 
14.6.2 Floors, caps and range forwards 
A ﬂoor is an instrument which sets a minimum price to be received by the oil producer or other enterprise. If the average price prevailing in the market exceeds the ﬂoor price, no payment is made by either the producer or the bank. 
A ﬂoor will be attrac-
tive to a producer to minimise or reduce the downside potential of future price movements to be received for its production. However
, a commission or premium will be required at the outset 
by the bank entering into the swap. 
A cap is an instrument that sets the maximum price (ceiling) 
to be received by the oil producer or other enterprise. This limits the upside potential but does not limit downside risk. Such a transaction can only be speculative from the producer
’s point of 
view. Here, an initial payment will be made by the bank to the producer. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.6/page 3

--- Page 684/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
If prices exceed the cap price, a payment is made by the pro -
ducer to the bank. If prices fall below the cap, no further pay -
ments are made between the producer and the bank. 
A range forward combines the elements of both a ﬂoor and 
a cap by setting a ﬂoor price and ceiling price. For example, an oil producer (monthly production – 100,000 barrels) and bank may set a ﬂoor of $16 per barrel and a ceiling price of $21 per barrel. The per barrel difference in price will be settled between the 2 parties if the average price is outside the range set. If the average price is $15 per barrel, a payment of $100,000 ($16–$15 ¥ 100,000 barrels) is made to the producer
. The following adjust-
ment is made to turnover, assuming the transaction is a hedge: Dr Cash $100,000 Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $100,000 
If the average price rises to $25 per barrel the producer pays $400,000 ($25–$21 ¥ 100,000 barrels) to the bank with the fol-
lowing adjustment to turnover: Dr Turnover – crude oil sales $400,000 Cr 
Cash $400,000 
In both cases, the producer will have recorded the initial sale of its month’
s production as turnover at the prevailing market price. 
If the average price of crude is in the range $16 to $21 per barrel, no payment is made by either party. 14.6.3 Participation hedge 
A participation hedge is similar to the swaps already described, except that the settlement between the bank and the enterprise will be based upon a proportion of the per barrel difference in oil price. 
For example, an oil producer enters into a swap as a hedge 
with a bank on the following terms: 
•	60,000 barrels per month are swapped for a year, 
•	monthly settlement is made based on a ﬂoor of $20 per barrel, 
•	if the average price falls below $20 per barrel, the pro-ducer receives a cash payment amounting to the dif-ference between the average price and $20 for each barrel produced, 
14.6/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 685/964 ---
14 Accounting
•	if the average price exceeds $20 per barrel, the pro-
ducer pays 20% of the per barrel difference in price for the volume hedged for each barrel produced, and 
•	there is no initial premium or payment. 
In the example, if the average price of crude is $18 per barrel, a payment of $120,000 ($20–$18 ¥ 60,000 
bbls) will be made by the 
bank to the producer resulting in the following accounting entry being made: 
Dr Cash $120,000 
Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $120,000 
If the average price is $25 per barrel, the producer pays the 
bank $60,000 ($25–$20 ¥ 20% ¥ 60,000 
bbls) with the following 
accounting entry being made: 
Dr Turnover – crude oil sales $60,000 Cr 
Cash $60,000 
If an oil producer enters into a contract which provides for 
it to receive 20% of the price difference when the average price is below the ﬂoor but pay 100% of the difference in excess of the ﬂoor
, the transaction is speculative in nature and cannot be 
accounted for as a hedge. But if the enterprise was a reﬁner acquiring crude for reﬁnery intake, a contract of this nature would be a hedge, while the terms in the previous example would be regarded as speculative. 14.6.4 Swaps contracts and accounting periods 
In the examples considered above, monthly settlements were made between the enterprise and the bank. Where the swaps were hedge transactions, the cash settlement is reﬂected as an adjustment to turnover
. Where speculative, the cash settlement 
is not shown as an adjustment to turnover but within other oper-ating income or expense (and therefore excluded from gross proﬁt). 
The terms of the swap may be such that an oil producer may 
hedge 12 months’ 
production with settlement between the pro-
ducer and bank taking place at the end of the year. If the con-tract year straddles an enterprise’s ﬁnancial year end, the gain or loss on the contract at its ﬁnancial year end will need to be assessed. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.6/page 5

--- Page 686/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
For example, on 1 January the producer swaps annual pro -
duction of 2,400,000 barrels for barrels at $22 per barrel, receiv -
ing or paying 100% of the per barrel difference. Settlement is at the end of the 12 month period. Its ﬁnancial year end is 31 March, when it has produced 800,000 barrels receiving average proceeds of $20 per barrel. Its forecast production for the next 9 months is 1,600,000 barrels. 
Although settlement will not be made until 31 December, the 
enterprise will have received revenues of $16 million (800,000 barrels ¥ $20). 
Dr Cash $16,000,000 
Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $16,000,000 
It will make an adjustment to turnover at 31 March to reﬂect 
the unrealised gain of $1.6 million ($22–$20 ¥ 800,000 barrels) 
on the swap contract at this date: Dr Debtors – unrealised gain on swap $1,600,000 Cr 
Turnover – crude oil sales $1,600,000 
Where there are variations in volumes produced to date in 
relation to forecast production, or if there are variations in fore-cast production for the remaining contract period, consideration will need to be given to the determination of the adjustment to be made to revenues. 
•	If production for the period is 800,000 barrels but the forecast for the full year is increased to 3,200,000 barrels, it would be appropriate to regard the enter-prise as hedging 75 per cent of its production. Conse-quently, the adjustment at 31 March would be reduced to $1,200,000. 
•	If production for the period remains at 800,000 barrels but forecast for the full year is reduced to 1,600,000 barrels, the adjustment to turnover at 31 March remains at $1,600,000. (This assumes that the swap contract is unaffected if annual production falls short of forecast). 
•	Variations in production for the period to date will result in corresponding changes to the adjustment to turnover
, assuming that the forecast for the full year 
remains unchanged. 
•	If both production to 31 March and the full year fore-cast vary, the adjustment to turnover should be based 
14.6/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 687/964 ---
14 Accounting
on actual production to date in relation to the revised full year production forecast. However, where the full year forecast production increases, the adjustment should be pro-rated appropriately. 
In all cases, the terms of the contract will need to be considered as these may inﬂuence the accounting treatment adopted. For example, penalties for not meeting the agreed swap quantity should be recognised. 14.6.5 Requirements for hedge accounting 
As with forward contracts, hedge accounting can only be employed if the swap contract meets the standard criteria of high effectiveness and hedge designation. Where any of these criteria are not met, the swap contract should be regarded as speculative and unrealised gains and losses should be recognised immedi-ately in the proﬁt and loss account and should not be deferred. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.6/page 7

--- Page 688/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 689/964 ---
14.7 Options 
Option contracts are contracts that provide the owner with the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell a speciﬁed item at a ﬁxed price during a speciﬁed period. The owner of an option pays a non-refundable fee (premium) to the seller of an option. Options, as with futures, may be traded on regulated exchanges or, as with forwards, may be traded directly with another party. 
Accounting guidance for options can be drawn from FAS 133 
which, as already discussed, relates to accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities. 14.7.1 Effectiveness 
Unlike futures and forwards which have two-sided risk and return characteristics, options have only one-sided risk and return characteristics. In the case of options, the enterprise can allow a put option to lapse if the current market price of the underlying asset is in excess of the strike price at maturity
. In 
the case of a call option, the enterprise would not exercise its right if the current purchase price of an asset was below the exer-cise price of the option. In the case of futures and forwards, the enterprise does not have this choice and must settle the relevant contracts even if it is not to the enterprise’
s advantage. 
One of the requirements for hedge accounting to apply under 
F
AS 133, as discussed earlier, is for high effectiveness to be 
demonstrated. As mentioned above, an option contract provides the owner with the right, but not the obligation, to purchase or sell a speciﬁed item at a ﬁxed price during a speciﬁed period and the owner pays a non-refundable fee (premium) to the seller of the option. The time value, that is the premium, for an at-the-money or out-of-the-money option contract represents a cost of the hedge and generally would not be effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash ﬂows of the hedged item. There-fore, only the option’s intrinsic value would be effective as a one-sided hedge of a hedged item and would be considered in the assessment of hedge effectiveness. 
For example, assume that an enterprise is concerned with 
the downside price risk of stocks of crude oil and, therefore, pur-chases an at-the-money put option. Assume also that the en-terprise assesses hedge effectiveness based on changes in the option’
s intrinsic value. The intrinsic value of the put option will 
be highly effective in offsetting the decreases in the fair value 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.7/page 1

--- Page 690/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
(below the option’ s strike price) of the stocks held. Any increases 
in the fair value of the stocks above the option’s strike price, however, would not be included in the measurement of hedge effectiveness, because they were not intended to be, or designated as, the hedged risk. 
As discussed earlier in respect of futures and forwards, FAS 
133 requires that an enterprise specify initially whether it will include all or only a portion of the gain or loss or cash ﬂows on a hedging instrument in its assessment of hedge effectiveness. FAS 133 permits an enterprise to exclude a component of the hedging instrument’s gain or loss or cash ﬂows from the assessment of hedge effectiveness only in certain circumstances, which are as follows: 
•	If the effectiveness of a hedge with an option contract is assessed based on changes in the option’
s intrinsic 
value, the change in the time value of the option con-tract would be excluded from the assessment of the hedge effectiveness. 
•	If the effectiveness of a hedge with an option contract is assessed based on changes in the option’
s minimum 
value, that is, its intrinsic value plus the effect of dis-counting, the change in the volatility value of the option contract would be excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness. 
In each circumstance above, changes in the fair value of the excluded component would be included currently in earnings, together with any ineffectiveness that results under the enter-prise’
s deﬁned method of assessing effectiveness. Except for the 
2 circumstances described above, enterprises are not permitted to exclude components of a hedging instrument’s gain or loss from the assessment of hedge ineffectiveness. 14.7.2 Proﬁt recognition 
The recognition of gains and losses on options will depend on the underlying motive for entering into the option contract. Where criteria for hedge accounting apply any gains and losses should be deferred and recognised in the proﬁt and loss in the same period as any proﬁts or losses on the underlying hedged asset, liability or transaction. Where the hedge accounting criteria are not met, the gains or losses on the option should be recognised immediately in the period’
s proﬁt and loss account. This would 
be the case where a transaction was entered into for speculative reasons. Strict accounting treatment would require the separa-
14.7/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 691/964 ---
14 Accounting
tion of an option premium paid – effectively the cost of the option – into its intrinsic value and time value, with the latter beingamortised on a systematic and rational basis to maturity
. 
However, in many cases, the time value element may not be a signiﬁcant or material component and may not, therefore, warrant a different accounting treatment. 
In line with futures and forwards accounting, the option 
should be carried in the enterprise’
s balance sheet at market 
value where the hedged item is also carried at market value. If it is carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value, the option should be carried at the higher of cost and net realisable value, as illustrated below. This applies whether the option is traded on a recognised exchange or not. 
The one sided nature of an option can be illustrated by way 
of a simple example. 
An enterprise has an asset worth $100 which 
is accounted for at the lower of cost or net realisable value. To protect itself against adverse price movements, it acquires a put option to sell the asset for $100 at a ﬁxed time in the future. The cost of this right to the enterprise is $10. 
If the asset value falls to $80, the enterprise would write 
down its carrying value to this amount, which is the lower of cost or net realisable value. The value of the option rises from $10 to $30 and, by marking to market, the gain on the option offsets exactly the loss on the asset when the asset is ultimately sold and the option closed out. The gains and losses on both are recog-nised in the proﬁt and loss account in the same period. 
If the asset value rises to $120, the carrying amount remains 
at cost of $100. The option is carried at $10, being the higher of cost ($10) or net realisable value ($nil). However
, if the asset was 
carried at market value (say the asset being hedged was a futures contract), the option would be revalued to a market value of $nil, the enterprise thereby recognising a proﬁt of $10. 
Where options are not traded on a recognised exchange, val-
uation of the option may become an issue and it may be neces-sary to derive a price using a theoretical model. In such a case, it may be appropriate to discount the price to reﬂect any lack of liquidity in the market. 14.7.3 Commissions and margin payments 
Options trading will normally involve the payment of a commis-sion or brokerage charge at the outset of the transaction. As this is a transactional-based charge, this is most appropriately expensed to the proﬁt and loss account as incurred, regardless of whether or not the option is to be treated as a hedge. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.7/page 3

--- Page 692/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Brokers may also require the payment of initial and varia -
tion margins in respect of options trading. As discussed earlier in relation to futures trading, these margins represent deposits with brokers and therefore are included appropriately within the enterprise’s debtors, again regardless of whether or not the option is to be treated as a hedge. 
14.7/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 693/964 ---
14.8 Physical hedges 
An enterprise may decide to hold physical inventories, rather than holding paper instruments such as oil futures, as a hedge against other assets held or against a ﬁrm commitment or antic-ipated transaction. 
For example, a power generator may have a commitment to 
buy heavy fuel oil at prevailing market prices in the UK in 3 months’ 
time. By taking advantage of currently low prices in 
another geographic market, say Singapore, the enterprise’s Singaporean afﬁliate may acquire an equivalent quantity of heavy fuel oil on the spot market on behalf of the enterprise. In three months’ time when prices have recovered, the enterprise acquires the heavy fuel oil it is contracted to purchase in the UK and sells the product previously acquired in Singapore. 
The result of these transactions (ignoring the effects of 
foreign exchange movements and storage costs) is that the enter-prise has hedged its commitment in the UK through the holding of physical inventories, albeit at a different location. 
Assuming 
stocks are sold in Singapore at similar prices to those paid in the UK, the net cost to the enterprise is the lower cost of the product originally acquired in Singapore. 14.8.1 Deﬁnitions 
In the above example, the enterprise has effectively eliminated its price exposure on a ﬁrm commitment. However
, for hedge 
accounting to apply, the usual hedge criteria must apply: 
•	designation of speciﬁc physical inventories as a hedge, 
•	adequate degree of effectiveness between the price of the physical inventories held and the underlying item being hedged, and 
•	the underlying transaction or item to be hedged must expose the enterprise to price risk (not required under F
AS 133). 
Where the acquisition of the physical hedge and its disposal take place within a single accounting period, the question of deferral of gains and losses will not be an issue. However
, where an 
accounting period is straddled, the physical inventory held as a hedge should be carried in the balance sheet at market value. Any unrealised gain or loss at the period end should be deferred until the underlying hedged item crystallises. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.8/page 1

--- Page 694/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
In addition, as with forward contracts, an issue that arises 
is whether the purchase and sale of the physical hedge should be reported gross (as part of the enterprise’s purchases and sales). To do so, however, would distort reported purchases and sales. Instead, the enterprise should determine the net gain or loss on the physical hedge and include this amount within purchases (in the case of a hedged purchase commitment) or sales (in the case of a hedged sales commitment). 
In the absence of authoritative guidance, accounting for 
physical hedge transactions on a gross basis is considered accept-able. However, the physical assets used as the hedge should be clearly identiﬁable, legal title to these assets should pass to the purchaser
, and settlement of the transaction should normally be 
based upon the gross value of the assets traded. 
The enterprise should disclose adequately the nature of its 
physical hedging activities in its ﬁnancial statements. These dis-closures should include: 
•	the enterprise’s accounting policy concerning physical hedges, 
•	the nature and level of hedging activity, and 
•	unrealised gains and losses at the period end. 
14.8.2 FAS 133 
FAS 133 does not permit an enterprise to apply hedge account-ing when a non-derivative instrument is used as an economic hedge of an asset, liability
, ﬁrm commitment or forecasted pur-
chase or sale. In developing FAS 133, the FASB believed that hedge accounting generally should not be permitted for non-derivative instruments because an application of the provisions of F
AS 133 would often override the established measurement 
method for those instruments, simply because they were part of a hedging relationship. Consequently, the non-derivative instru-ment should be treated as a normal item under the relevant accounting standard. 14.8.3 Speculative inventories 
Physical inventories may also be held for speculative purposes. Where this is the case, or where any of the criteria for hedge accounting do not apply
, the physical inventory held should be 
carried at market value. Any unrealised gains or losses should be recognised immediately in the enterprise’s proﬁt and loss account rather than being deferred. Such gains and losses should be 
14.8/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 695/964 ---
14 Accounting
reported within “Other Operating Income” and disclosed sepa-rately in the notes to the ﬁnancial statements to enable a proper understanding of the enterprise’
s ﬁnancial statements and its 
accounting policy on physical inventories, together with disclo-sure of the nature and level of its trading in physical inventories. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.8/page 3

--- Page 696/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 697/964 ---
14.9 Disclosure requirements 
In order to enable a user of a set of accounts to obtain a full and proper understanding of an enterprise’s results for a period and its ﬁnancial position as depicted in the balance sheet, it is nec-essary for the enterprise’s accounting policies to be disclosed fully. Where oil trading activity is signiﬁcant, it will also be appropri-ate to disclose the nature of the trading activity undertaken and items being hedged. The existence of material positions held, amounts included within income for the period and the extent of unrealised gains and losses included at the period end should also be disclosed. 14.9.1 United States 
In the US, disclosure requirements are evolving as a result of the project by the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB)* to 
consider ﬁnancial instruments and off-balance sheet ﬁnancing. The latest phase of the FASB’s work has resulted in the issue of FAS 133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging 
Activities, issued in 1998 and revised in 2000 by FAS 138 
Accounting for Certain Derivative Instruments and Certain Hedging Activities, an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 133 . 
In addition, it should be noted that the Derivatives Implementa-tion Group (DIG) established by the FASB have made an exten-sive series of pronouncements which address the application of the standard to particular scenarios. 
FAS 133 supersedes FAS 80, 105 and 119, and amends FAS 
107 to make it consistent with F
AS 133’s measurement provi-
sions, and to include in FAS 107 the disclosure provisions in respect of concentrations of credit risk, taken from F
AS 105. In 
particular, FAS 133 eliminates the previous requirements to disclose: 
•	the face, contract or notional principal amount for all derivative ﬁnancial instruments held at the balance sheet date; and 
•	the average fair value of derivative ﬁnancial instru-ments held for trading purposes. 
* Further information on FASB disclosure requirements and the 
work of the Derivatives Implementation Group can be found on the F
ASB website (www.fasb.org). 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.9/page 1

--- Page 698/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
The key components of F AS 133’s disclosure requirements are as 
follows: 
•	An enterprise that holds or issues derivative ins-
truments (or non-derivative instruments that are des-ignated and qualify as hedging instruments) needs to disclose its objectives for holding or issuing those instruments, the context needed to understand those objectives, and its strategies for achieving those objectives. 
•	Qualitative disclosures about an enterprise’s objectives and strategies for using derivative instruments may be more meaningful if such objectives and strategies are deﬁned in the context of an enterprise’
s overall risk 
management proﬁle (the enterprise is encouraged but not required to provide such additional qualitative disclosures). 
•	For derivative instruments that have been designated and have qualiﬁed as fair value hedging instruments and for the related hedged items: 
i)	 The net gain or loss recognised in earnings during 
the reporting period, representing the amount of the hedges’ 
ineffectiveness and the component of the 
derivative instruments’ gain or loss, if any, excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness, and a description of where the net gain or loss is reported in the statement of income or other statement of ﬁnancial performance. 
ii) The amount of net gain or loss recognised in earnings 
when a hedged ﬁrm commitment no longer qualiﬁes as a fair value hedge. 
•	For derivative instruments that have been designated and have qualiﬁed as cash ﬂow hedging instruments and for the related hedged transactions: 
i) 
The net gain or loss recognised in earnings during 
the reporting period, representing the amount of the hedges’ 
ineffectiveness and the component of the 
derivative instruments’ gain or loss, if any, excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness, and a description of where the net gain or loss is reported in the statement of income or other statement of ﬁnancial performance. 
ii)	 A description of the transactions or other events that 
will result in the reclassiﬁcation into earnings of 
14.9/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 699/964 ---
14 Accounting
gains and losses that are reported in accumulated other comprehensive income, and the estimated net amount of the existing gains or losses at the report-ing date that is expected to be reclassiﬁed into earn-ings within the next 12 months. 
iii) 
The maximum length of time over which the enter-
prise is hedging its exposure to the variability in future cash ﬂows for forecasted transactions (exclud-ing those transactions related to the payment of vari-able interest on existing ﬁnancial instruments). 
iv) 
The amount of gains and losses reclassiﬁed into earn-ings as a result of the discontinuance of cash ﬂow hedges because it is probable that the original fore-casted transactions will not occur. 
It is worth noting that an enterprise may need to modify infor-mation systems to accumulate some of the data that they will need if it is to comply with F
AS 133’s disclosure requirements. For 
example, for fair-value hedges the net gain or loss recognised in earnings during the reporting period that represents the amount of the hedges’ ineffectiveness and the component of the deriva-tives’ gain or loss that is excluded from the assessment of hedge ineffectiveness have to be disclosed separately
. 
FAS 133 does not specify display requirements for reporting 
the effects of hedging transactions in the income statement. Con-sequently, diversity in practice may develop. Current practice has generally been to present the results on a combined, or net, basis. It is expected that, after adopting F
AS 133, most enterprises will 
continue the current practice of presenting “net” all of the gains and losses of the hedging instrument and the hedged item, because this better conveys the economic results of the hedging activity. Financial statement users, however, may prefer a sepa-rate presentation of the ineffective portion of the hedge results. A 
net presentation should be acceptable, provided that the hedge 
relationship is highly effective. A net presentation, however, would not be appropriate for hedging relationships that are not highly effective. 
It is worth noting that FAS 133 requires disclosure in the 
footnotes of all hedges’ 
ineffectiveness, which will enable ﬁnan-
cial statement users to discern the amount of hedge ineffective-ness that has occurred, even though derivative gains and losses might be presented net in the income statement with the results of the hedged item. 
For cash-ﬂow hedging transactions, FAS 133 required that 
enterprises display
, as a separate classiﬁcation within other 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.9/page 3

--- Page 700/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
comprehensive income, the net gains and losses on derivative 
instruments that qualify as cash-ﬂow hedging instruments. Enterprises must also disclose separately a roll-forward of the activity for such net gains and losses that are deferred in other comprehensive income. 
14.9.2 United Kingdom 
In the UK, Financial Reporting Standard 13, Derivatives and 
other ﬁnancial instruments: disclosures (FRS 13) was issued in 
September 1998. It represents the ﬁrst stage in the development of accounting standards covering ﬁnancial instruments in the UK, and its scope includes certain commodity contracts. FRS 13 covers disclosure requirements only and applies to entities that have any of their capital instruments listed or publicly traded on a stock exchange or market. 
Although it is not mandatory for 
other companies, the requirements of the standard illustrate good practice disclosures for other companies where the use of ﬁnancial instruments is signiﬁcant. 
The standard requires that entities to which it applies 
provide certain narrative and numerical disclosures of their ﬁnancial instruments, including derivatives. The narrative dis-closures describe the role that ﬁnancial instruments have in cre-ating or changing the risks faced by an entity; they also describe the entity’
s objectives and policies in using ﬁnancial instruments 
to cover these risks. The numerical disclosures are intended to show how these objectives and policies were implemented in the period and provide information for evaluating signiﬁcant, or potentially signiﬁcant, exposures. 
FRS 13 considers cash-settled commodity contracts to fall 
within the scope of the standard, although not all the disclosure requirements required for ﬁnancial instruments more generally apply to such contracts. Contracts for the purchase of commodi-ties (including gas) for actual or physical delivery and use in its business are not considered as cash-settled contracts and are outside the scope of FRS 13. 
The narrative disclosures required by FRS 13 that apply to 
cash-settled commodity contracts are: 
•	an explanation of the role ﬁnancial instruments have had during the period in creating or changing the risks that the entity faces in its activities. This should include an explanation of the objectives and policies for issuing or holding ﬁnancial instruments, and the 
14.9/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 701/964 ---
14 Accounting
strategies that have been followed in the period for achieving those objectives; 
•	an explanation should be provided of how the period-end numerical disclosures shown in the ﬁnancial statements reﬂect the objectives, policies and strate-gies; and 
•	if ﬁnancial instruments are used as hedges, the trans-actions and risks that have been hedged should be described, including the period of time until they are expected to occur; the instruments used for hedging purposes should also be described, distinguishing between those that have been accounted for using hedge accounting and those that have not. 
The numerical disclosures required by FRS 13 that apply to cash-settled commodity contracts are: 
•	fair value disclosures: an entity should group its ﬁnan-cial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities into appropriate cat-egories and disclose, for each category, the aggregate fair value at the balance sheet date together with the aggregate carrying amount; the aggregate fair value of those items with positive fair values should also be dis-closed separately from those with negative fair value amounts. In determining the categories into which the instruments are grouped, the entity should take into account the purpose for which each asset and liability is held and the type of asset or liability involved. The methods and assumptions used for determining fair values should also be disclosed; 
•	if the entity trades in ﬁnancial instruments, disclo-sures should also be made about: the net gain or loss from trading in ﬁnancial instruments that has been included in the proﬁt and loss account during the period, appropriately analysed; period-end fair values of ﬁnancial assets and, separately
, of ﬁnancial liabili-
ties, held or issued for trading purposes (average fair values over the period should also be disclosed if the period-end position is unrepresentative); and 
•	where ﬁnancial assets and liabilities are used as hedges, disclosures should include: the cumulative aggregate gains and losses that are unrecognised at the balance sheet date; the cumulative aggregate gains and losses carried-forward at the balance sheet date 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 14.9/page 5

--- Page 702/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
pending recognition in the proﬁt and loss account; the 
extent to which such gains and losses are expected to be recognised in the proﬁt and loss account in the next period; and, the amount of gains and losses recognised in the current period’s proﬁt and loss account that arose in previous periods but were unrecognised or carried forward in the balance sheet at the start of the current reporting period. If instruments held as hedges have been re-designated during the period and are no longer held as hedges, the amount of gains and losses that arose in previous periods but are now recognised should also be disclosed. 
Where an entity participates in an illiquid commodity market that is dominated by very few participants and disclosure of such information at the time ﬁnancial statements are issued is likely to move the markets concerned signiﬁcantly, FRS 13 allows the entity not to give the disclosures relating to such instruments. However, the fact that such information has not been disclosed and the reasons for non-disclosure should be given. 
14.9/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 703/964 ---
14.10 Conclusions 
An enterprise may use a range of instruments – such as futures, forwards, swaps and options – to enable it to manage its expo-sure to the risk of both price and exchange rate volatility. The proper accounting for an enterprise’
s oil trading activities is 
dependent on a clear understanding of the enterprise’s strategy and transactions. At present, under US GAAP, FAS 133 is pre-scriptive in its approach in relation to measurement issues and rules about hedge accounting, however
, in the UK there is limited 
accounting guidance. 
In order to comply with FAS 133’s accounting and disclosure 
requirements, enterprises will need to develop information systems that can track and accumulate data on gains and losses related to each individual hedge relationship. Some enterprises may have to draw on considerable resources to accomplish this. 
As a result of limited guidance in the UK, the potential 
diversity of accounting treatments makes disclosure of the nature and extent of transactions – and the accounting policies adopted – all the more important. The reported results of an enterprisein the UK may therefore differ considerably as a result of the accounting treatment applied to its oil trading activities. 
As a 
result, a proper understanding of the ﬁnancial statements of a company engaged in oil trading is dependent on clear and appro-priate disclosures of the accounting policies and the nature of the transactions it undertakes. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 14.10/page 1

--- Page 704/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 705/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading 
Phil Greatrex 
15.1 Introduction
15.2 United Kingdom
15.2.1 The Oil Taxation Ofﬁce (OTO)
15.2.2 Scope of tax
15.2.3 Residence
15.2.4 Differing trading entities
15.2.5 Taxation of income and gains
15.2.6 Treaties
15.2.7 Administration
15.2.8 Special considerations for oil traders
15.2.9 Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT)
15.3 United States
15.3.1 Scope of tax
15.3.2 Residence
15.3.3 Taxation of income and gains
15.3.4 Treaties
15.3.5 Administration
15.3.6 Special considerations for oil traders
15.4 Singapore
15.4.1 Scope of tax
15.4.2 Residence
15.4.3 Taxation of income and gains
15.4.4 Differing types of entities
15.4.5 Treaties
15.4.6 Administration
15.4.7 Special incentives for oil traders
15.5 United Kingdom taxation of trading
instruments
15.5.1 Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT)
15.5.2 Corporation Tax
15.5.3 The ring fence
15.5.4 Capital gains
15.5.5 Spot and forward contracts
15.5.6 Futures contracts
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 706/964 ---
15.5.7 Options
15.5.8 Swaps
15.6 The UK PRT nomination scheme
15.6.1 Outline
15.6.2 Calculation of market value
15.6.3 Tracking the database
15.6.4 The Revenue’s response
Appendix 
15.1 Articles from the OECD model tax treaty
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 707/964 ---
15.1 Introduction 
The oil trading markets are now very sophisticated with many of the players trading 24 hours a day by having traders based in the three main time zones of North America, Europe and the Far East. 
Most developed tax jurisdictions attempt, ultimately, to tax 
the proﬁts generated in their location but it can be almost impos-sible with global oil trading activities to assess where particular proﬁts are being generated. W
ith traders in touch with each other 
and with the market constantly, the fact that a particular con-tract is made in, say, Europe which generates a proﬁt does not necessarily mean that proﬁt has been earned for the corporation in the European location as the contract could have been taken out to hedge a loss making position elsewhere in the world-wide group. 
Tax jurisdictions use a number of mechanisms, to try and 
ensure they are able to tax the proﬁts earned in their location, including the application of transfer pricing rules and the enter-ing into of double taxation treaty arrangements. However, with the global nature of oil trading activities, it has become increas-ingly difﬁcult to isolate proﬁt or loss by location and it seems likely that increasingly tax jurisdictions will simply attempt to collect what they deem to be a reasonable amount of tax without trying to accurately assess the proﬁts made in their location. 
A global trading group will generally be concerned to ensure 
that double taxation does not arise and that the world-wide effec-tive rate of tax borne by the group is not in excess of the home country rate. T
ypically groups will, therefore, be looking to min-
imise taxation outside the “home country” location. In these cir-cumstances agreeing a commission or cost mark up basis of taxation in other locations can be attractive, as can locating the activities in a country which offers special incentives to oil traders. 
The following sections set out the main principles for the tax-
ation of oil trading activities in three of the main oil trading centres of the world, i.e. the UK, the USA 
and Singapore, and 
include a detailed description of the taxation of oil trading instruments in the UK and the operation of the UK Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) nomination scheme. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.1/page 1

--- Page 708/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 709/964 ---
15.2 United Kingdom 
15.2.1 The Oil Taxation Ofﬁce (OTO) 
The Oil Taxation Ofﬁce (OTO) is the technical division within the UK Inland Revenue responsible for all oil related activities so far as direct tax is concerned. The taxation affairs of most, but not all, oil trading groups are handled by the Oil T
axation Ofﬁce. 
It has built up considerable expertise in the area of inter company transfer pricing and over the last decade has learnt a great deal about the way international crude and product operations are conducted. 
The following is a description of the basic domestic legisla-
tion for the taxation of companies operating in the UK and how this may be affected by Double T
axation Treaties. 
15.2.2 Scope of tax 
A company which is resident in the United Kingdom is charge-able to UK corporation tax on its world-wide proﬁts ( S.8 
T
A 1988). 
A non-UK resident company carrying on a trade in the UK 
through a branch or agency is also liable to corporation tax, but only on the proﬁts attributable to the branch or agency ( S.1
1 
TA 1988). 
The conclusion of contracts in the UK is a major, but not con-
clusive, factor in establishing whether a trade is being carried on in the UK. However
, even when contracts are concluded outside 
the UK there may still be a trade being carried on in the UK, depending on the activities and inﬂuence of the personnel based in the UK. 
The proﬁts of activities carried on in certain controlled 
foreign corporations (CFCs) – i.e. foreign subsidiaries – of UK resident companies, may be taxed in the UK if the activities are based outside the UK for the purpose of avoiding UK tax and certain other conditions are not satisﬁed ( S.747 T
A 1988). 
Supplies of goods situated in the UK or of services treated 
as supplied in the UK will generally be within the scope of V
AT 
regardless of the residence of the supplier. 
15.2.3 Residence 
Since 1988 a UK incorporated company has been automatically resident in the UK for corporation tax purposes ( S.66 F 
A 1988). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.2/page 1

--- Page 710/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Non-UK incorporated companies may also be UK resident if 
their central management and control is situated in the UK. 
Central management and control of a company is exercised 
normally where the Board of Directors meet and where the more important decisions regarding the running of the company are made. This is not necessarily the same as where the day to day management of the company is exercised although the two activ-ities are often carried out at the same location. 
It is possible for companies to be treated as resident in the 
UK under UK domestic law and resident elsewhere under the domestic law of another country
. In these cases the relevant 
double taxation treaty will normally determine, for the purposes of the taxation of proﬁts and application of the treaty, which of the two locations the company will be deemed to be resident in. Certain treaties such as the UK/US treaty, however, permit the company to be treated as resident in both locations. 
Furthermore, under a double taxation treaty, if a company 
which is incorporated in the UK is treated as resident outside the UK, usually by virtue of being effectively managed outside the UK, it will also be treated as not resident under UK domestic law (
S.249 FA 1994). 
Residence is not generally important for VAT. 
15.2.4 Differing trading entities 
Representative ofﬁces of non-UK companies A representative ofﬁce will typically not be subject to UK tax on any service it supplies to its head ofﬁce. The representatives will not be carrying on a trade or part of the company’
s trade and thus 
will be outside the scope of UK tax. 
Some representative ofﬁces provide such a substantial level 
of service in information gathering etc. that the activity itself is regarded as the carrying on of a business in providing services. In this case the proﬁt chargeable to UK tax is generally deter-mined as a percentage of costs (i.e. the turnover is a mark up on costs incurred by the UK activity
, resulting in the mark up being 
the proﬁt). 
The percentage mark up to be applied will vary with the 
level of service and expertise being provided. This ‘cost plus’ 
basis 
can only be agreed in advance, except in very straightforward cases, by way of a formal advance pricing agreement which can be very time consuming to complete. It is possible to obtain a post transaction ruling after the end of the accounting period that avoids any possibility of penalties applying, but generally com-
15.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 711/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
panies must decide what is a suitable transfer price, document the basis of their decision, and ﬁle their return accordingly. 
In addition, the UK has double taxation treaties with many 
countries which would normally 
, in any event, exempt from tax 
the activities of a representative ofﬁce that was merely gather-ing information in the UK or otherwise performing a support function. T
o the extent the ofﬁce is instrumental in introducing 
or effecting sales, however, a charge to tax will arise as with a branch or agency ( see below ). 
A representative ofﬁce will only remain completely free of 
tax if it is a branch of a non-resident company and genuinely only acts as an information gathering centre. If the representative ofﬁce activity is put into a UK company
, that company will be 
regarded as providing services for which it should earn an arm’s length fee (again normally computed on the ‘cost plus’ basis men-tioned earlier). 
For VAT purposes a representative ofﬁce will be a business 
establishment, albeit not one which is directly concerned with making supplies. 
As such it is not required to register for VAT 
but may do so on a voluntary basis if the company wishes to recover any UK VAT paid on business costs. Branch or agency A foreign company, trading in the UK through a branch or an agency
, will be chargeable to corporation tax in the UK on any 
proﬁts attributable to that branch or agency activity. (See the deﬁnition of business proﬁts attributable to a foreign branch contained in the OECD model tax treaty in Appendix 15.1.) In this connection the term ‘agency’ can include a broker or other intermediary instrumental in carrying out the trading activities. 
However, there are exclusions from any charge in the case 
of independent brokers and investment managers carrying out certain investment transactions. 
In many cases the terms of a relevant double taxation treaty 
will exclude independent commission agents acting in the ordi-nary course of their business from being a permanent establish-ment (i.e. branch or agency of the overseas company) even if they have power to conclude contracts. The same is not true, however
, for companies which are related. (See the deﬁnition of 
a permanent establishment in the OECD model tax treaty in Appendix 15.1.) 
For VAT purposes the position is broadly the same. The 
existence of a branch or agency in the UK through which trading 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.2/page 3

--- Page 712/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
is undertaken will normally call for the V AT registration of the 
overseas company. Any supplies of services are normally treated as taking place at the location of the supplier. However, under oil trading contracts (particularly traded or over the counter options or price swaps) the supply is treated as taking place at the loca
-
tion of the recipient. Brokerage or agency services relating to over the counter deals may be treated as taking place where the underlying trade takes place. For contracts treated as supplies of goods, different rules apply based on their location at the point of delivery or appropriation. UK subsidiary UK resident subsidiaries are chargeable to UK corporation tax on their world-wide proﬁts, wherever generated. 
A credit is, 
however, available against the UK liability for any tax suffered on the same proﬁts in a foreign jurisdiction. To the extent that services are provided to non-UK resident afﬁliates, or non-UK branches of UK afﬁliates, arm’s length prices have to be applied in computing taxable proﬁts. 
For VAT the position is basically the same as for a branch. 
15.2.5 Taxation of income and gains 
The rate of corporation tax is currently (1 April 2001) 30 per cent, although this rate may be reduced to the small companies rate (currently 20 per cent) where the proﬁts charged to tax are small (currently less than £1.5 million) or 10 per cent if proﬁts are below £10,000. However
, these limits are reduced for group com-
panies, by being divided by the number of active companies in the world-wide group. For large groups, these reliefs are gener-ally of no signiﬁcance. 
Trading losses may be set off against other current year 
proﬁts or gains and can be carried forward indeﬁnitely for set off against future income of the same trade. T
rading losses may also 
be carried back against previous year’s chargeable proﬁts and gains ( S.393/393A TA 1988). 
Capital gains are chargeable as part of the corporation tax 
proﬁt. Capital losses brought forward and current year capital losses are set off against current year capital gains; there is no carry back of capital losses. 
Proﬁts from UK upstream oil and gas activities are “ring 
fenced” for corporation tax purposes such that losses and other reliefs from “non-ring fence” activities, such as oil trading cannot be utilised to reduce tax on ring fence proﬁts. 
15.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 713/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
The standard rate of VAT is 17.5 per cent with certain sup-
plies, notably ﬁnancial services, being exempt. Some commodity transactions treated as UK exchanges or involving exports are, however
, zero rated (i.e. taxed at 0 per cent). Certain supplies of 
exciseable goods in bond are outside the scope of VAT. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.2/page 5

--- Page 714/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
15.2.6 Treaties 
The UK has an extremely wide treaty network with fully com-prehensive treaties in place with all major trading locations in the world. The list of countries with which the UK has a full treaty is as follows: Algeria Antigua Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Bolivia Botswana Brunei Bulgaria Burma (Myanmar) Canada China (People’
s 
Republic) Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guernsey 
15.2/page 6 Guyana Pakistan 
Hungary Papua New Guinea 
Iceland Philippines 
India Poland 
Indonesia Portugal 
Ireland Romania 
Isle of Man Russian Federation 
Israel St. Christopher & Nevis 
Italy St. Vincent 
Ivory Coast Sierra Leone 
Jamaica Singapore 
Japan Slovak Republic 
Jersey Slovenia 
Kazakhstan Solomon Islands 
Kenya South Africa 
Kiribati Spain 
Korea Sri Lanka 
Kuwait Sudan 
Kyrgystan Swaziland 
Latvia Sweden 
Lesotho Switzerland 
Luxembourg Tajikistan 
Macedonia Thailand 
Malawi Trinidad 
Malaysia Tunisia 
Malta Turkey 
Mauritius Turkmenistan 
Mexico Tuvala 
Moldova Uganda 
Mongolia Ukraine 
Montserrat UAE 
Morocco USA 
Namibia Uzbekistan 
Netherlands Venezuela 
New Zealand Vietnam 
Nigeria Yugoslavia 
Norway Zambia 
Oman Zimbabwe 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 715/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
15.2.7 Administration 
The corporation tax payable by a UK company or a UK branch of an overseas company is based on proﬁts referable to its accounting period (which cannot in practical terms exceed one year since, where accounts cover a longer period, the results are time apportioned). Under the self assessment regime companies must return their proﬁts (having adopted arm’
s length prices for 
any non-arm’s length transactions) and compute the amount of tax due. The Inland Revenue will examine some returns, typi-cally those of larger companies, which is likely to include most oil traders. On examination they may require that amendments be made to the return. 
Tax for companies where the small companies’ rate does not 
apply ( see Section 15.2.5 ) is payable in four instalments – these 
being in months 7 and 10 of the year in question and in months 1 and 4 of the following year
. Some transitional reliefs do, 
however, apply until 2001. For other companies tax is not due until 9 months after the end of the period. 
A non-resident company may be assessable and chargeable 
to UK income tax or corporation tax in the name of the UK branch or agent. The UK branch or agent is charged and assessed in the same way as the non-resident company would be charged and assessed if it were UK resident ( S.126 F
A 1995 et seq.). 
VAT is accounted for on the basis of VAT accounting periods, 
usually of 3 months. Formal V
AT returns must be submitted, 
together with any tax, by the end of the month following. Delays in submission or payment or mistakes can incur substantial penalties (not deductible for corporation tax). Failure to register on time can also give rise to penalties. 15.2.8 Special considerations for oil traders 
Many international trading organisations have set up ofﬁces in London and, by having all contracts concluded outside the UK, have sought to keep themselves outside of the UK tax net. They would argue that they have not carried on a trade in the UK. In many such cases people based in London will do all of the initial work of ﬁnding potential buyers or sellers and dis-cussing price parameters to the point where a deal looks possi-ble. Agreement of the terms will then be done from the tax haven location with the ﬁnal contract documentation being sent from that location. Most companies with these operations have been able to agree with the UK Revenue a ‘cost plus’ 
basis of taxation 
(see Section 15.2.4 ). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.2/page 7

--- Page 716/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
However , such arrangements are becoming increasingly 
hard to operate. Firstly, the individuals based in London are usually traders by profession. They want to trade and for com
-
panies to use their expertise effectively they need to be able to trade. If, in reality
, the trader takes a deal almost to its conclu-
sion and then hands it over to a foreign location merely to imple-ment it, the additional paperwork required puts an unwanted burden on the operations and it could be that the trader has effec-tively created a trading presence for the company even without formalising the contract. 
Also, the Inland Revenue are becoming increasingly more 
adept at establishing where the true trading operation is being carried on and are able to extract much higher mark ups on cost, or perhaps establish that the foreign entity has traded in the UK. 
Further, new technology and trading practices make it difﬁ-
cult for contracts not to be concluded in the UK. This is particu-larly the case in futures trading, where the prices at which contracts are traded are constantly changing and trading can in effect only be done over the telephone or on screen with conﬁr-matory paperwork following later. 
Where UK-based traders actively trade in the market the 
group will generally want to seek to agree a basis of taxation with the UK Inland Revenue which will provide some certainty and minimise the risk of double taxation. 
Where the trading activity is substantial and contracts, 
when required, pass between trading ofﬁces at market values, the accounts for the UK branch or subsidiary will generally be used to determine the UK taxable proﬁt. 
However, where the activities are so intertwined with the 
global trading of the group and where the principal trader has the protection of a relevant double taxation treaty
, the proﬁt 
attributable to contracts entered into in the UK can sometimes be determined on a commission basis. The level of commission can often be agreed in advance with the Inland Revenue and the basis of taxation agreed may well include an element of ‘cost plus’ as well as a commission ( see Section 15.2.4 ). 
Where there is substantial speculative trading controlled by 
the UK traders outside the global network, the Inland Revenue will usually seek to isolate this to tax it separately
. 
For VAT, the position depends very much on the nature of 
what is being traded and the circumstances in which this takes place. 
As noted earlier, there is an important distinction between 
transactions which involve goods and those which represent services. This affects both the place of supply and, in some cases, the VAT liability. 
15.2/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 717/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
In general, contracts, other than pure agency arrangements, 
which involve spot, forward or traded futures in tangible com-modities such as oil or gas are supplies of goods. If the place of supply is in the UK the standard rate of 17
1/2 per cent will apply 
unless: 
•	the oil or gas is excisable and is sold whilst warehoused – i.e. in bond (when the supply is outside the scope ofUK V
AT); 
•	the oil or gas is imported and potentially subject to Customs duty and is sold while in bond (when it is outside the scope of UK V
AT); or 
•	the oil or gas is physically located outside the UK (when it is again outside the scope of UK V
AT); or 
•	the contracts are traded on an approved UK terminal market – in this case the IPE (when the supply is zero-rated). 
Where goods are brought into the UK from abroad the buyer or consignee will generally have to pay or account for V
AT on arrival 
unless the goods are taken into bond, when VAT generally becomes payable on removal for home use. This VAT can usually be deducted as input tax. This does not apply, however, to con-tracts which are not deliverable, such as contracts for differences, where the supply is seen as an exempt “monetary” ﬁnancial service. However
, it should be noted that for these purposes IPE 
Brent crude contracts are treated by Customs as deliverable. 
In addition, goods removed from bond are subject to VAT at 
the standard rate. 
Contracts involving options are treated as ﬁnancial services 
for V
AT. The place of supply, in broad terms, is where the recipi-
ent is established or has a place of business established to which the supply is made. If the place of supply is in the UK, the supply will be taxable at the standard rate unless the contract: 
•	is with a member of the IPE, when the supply is zero-rated; or 
•	is with a buying counterparty established outside the UK (when it will be outside the scope of UK V
AT); 
•	involves contracts which are not deliverable, such as contracts for differences when the supply is seen as a basically exempt “monetary” ﬁnancial service. 
The treatment of brokerage or agency services will tend to follow the same broad principles as the underlying trade will generally 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.2/page 9

--- Page 718/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
be seen as taking place for V AT where the underlying trade itself 
takes place. In some cases it is possible that the existence of a UK desk in a foreign company managing a global book may mean that the company is established in the UK for VAT. This need not be restricted to a branch situation, but can also apply where this is operated by an afﬁliate, depending on the scope of what that afﬁliate does in effecting particular sale or purchase transactions. The result may have a consequential impact on VAT liabilities. 
15.2.9 Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) 
Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) is chargeable on the proﬁts from the production of oil and gas under UK licences and any associ-ated income generated from assets used in the production process. However
, PRT was abolished in respect of ﬁelds which 
receive development consent after 15 March 1993. Oil trading proﬁts are not subject to PRT although the activities of oil traders can inﬂuence the price on which production is subject to PRT (see Section 15.5 ). 
15.2/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 719/964 ---
15.3 United States 
David Zimmerman & John S. Levin, Miller & Chevalier The US has long been a trading centre within the global market for oil trading activities with signiﬁcant amounts of trading taking place in New 
York, Houston and Chicago. 
15.3.1 Scope of tax 
US corporations US corporations are taxed on their world-wide income. A corpo-ration is treated as a US corporation if incorporated in the United States, regardless of where managed or controlled. US sub-sidiaries of a foreign corporation are taxed on their world-wide income in the same manner as other US corporations. 
Generally, US corporate shareholders of a foreign corpora-
tion are not taxed on the earnings of the foreign corporation until it pays a dividend. The US tax system has various provisions that attempt to discourage avoidance of US tax by diverting income to a foreign corporation. They include controlled foreign corpora-tion (CFC) provisions, foreign personal holding company pro-visions, foreign investment company provisions, and passive foreign investment company provisions. 
Although each of these 
provisions must be considered by any US corporation that owns stock in a foreign corporation, the most far-reaching of these are the rules dealing with CFCs. 
A CFC is any foreign corporation with more than 50 per 
cent of 
(i)	the total combined voting power of all classes of its stock entitled to vote, or 
(ii) the total value of its stock is owned, directly or indi-
rectly, or through certain related parties, by US share-holders on any day during the taxable year of the foreign corporation. 
US corporations owning 10 per cent or more of the voting stock of a CFC (US shareholders) are taxed on their share of the CFC’
s 
subpart F income, even if this is not distributed during the tax year. Subpart F income generally consists of passive income, including net gains from commodity transactions, such as oil and gas futures and forward transactions, unless substantially all of the CFC’s business is as an active producer, processor, handler, 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.3/page 1

--- Page 720/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
or merchant of commodities. Subpart F income also generally 
includes interest, dividends, royalties, gain from the sale of certain property, including shares of stock, and certain other categories of income. 
A tax credit is available to offset US tax liability on foreign 
source Subpart F income for foreign income taxes paid or accrued on that income. Foreign corporations Foreign corporations generally are taxed in the US as follows: 
(1) Net income that is effectively connected with the 
conduct of a US trade or business are taxed at regular US corporate rates (a maximum rate of 35 per cent). 
(2) Certain categories of US source income not effectively connected with the conduct of a US trade or business are taxed at a ﬂat rate of 30 per cent of gross income (unless a lower treaty rate applies). 
(3) Income of a foreign corporation’s US branch is also subject to a 30 per cent branch proﬁts tax (unless a lower treaty rate applies) imposed on: 
(i)	 the current earnings of the US branch that are 
effectively connected with the conduct of a US trade or business, 
(ii)	 interest paid by the US branch to a foreign lender, 
and 
(iii) interest expense attributable to the US branch 
that is deemed excessive. 
(4) A foreign corporation’s foreign income not effectively connected with a US trade or business is exempt from US taxation. 
Whether a foreign corporation’s US activities consist of a trade or business is determined under a facts and circumstances test. 
Generally, all of a foreign corporation’s US source income is 
treated as effectively connected with its US trade or business. Certain kinds of US source income, however
, such as capital 
gains, interest, dividends, rents, and royalties are treated as effectively connected only if they are derived from assets used or held for use in the conduct of the US business or the activities of the US business were a material factor in the realisation of such gain or income. 
Income from the sale of personal property, including oil con-
tracts, by a foreign corporation is generally US source income if 
15.3/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 721/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
the sale is attributable to a US ofﬁce or ﬁxed place of business (US ofﬁce) maintained by the foreign corporation. Such income is treated as US source income effectively connected with the conduct of a US trade or business. 
Income is generally attributable to a US ofﬁce if the US ofﬁce 
is a material factor in the realisation of the income. 
A US ofﬁce 
is a material factor in the realisation of the income if: 
(i)	the ofﬁce actively participates in soliciting the order
, negotiating the sale contract, or performing 
other signiﬁcant services necessary for the consum-mation of the agreement, which are not the subject of a separate agreement between the buyer and seller
, and 
(ii) the income is realised in the ordinary course of the 
foreign corporation’
s trade or business carried on 
through the US ofﬁce. 
Under a special exemption for inventory property sold for use, disposition, or consumption outside the US, income from such sale is foreign source income not effectively connected with the conduct of a US trade or business if the foreign corporation maintained an ofﬁce or ﬁxed place of business outside the US that materially participated in the sale of the inventory property
, even if the US ofﬁce also materially participated in 
the sale. 
Generally, a foreign corporation has a US ofﬁce if it main-
tains a ﬁxed facility in the United States where it carries on regular business activities. The ofﬁce of an independent agent is not treated as the US ofﬁce of its principal. The ofﬁce of a depend-ent agent, however, can constitute a US ofﬁce of a foreign corpo-ration if the agent can negotiate and conclude contracts in the foreign corporation’
s name or the agent has a stock of merchan-
dise from which it regularly ﬁlls orders on behalf of the foreign corporation. 
Gains and losses from the disposition of US real property 
interests (USRPIs) are treated as effectively connected with a US business. Included in the deﬁnition of a USRPI are interests in real property located in the United States (including any inter-est in an oil well) and, generally, stock of a US corporation if USRPIs comprise at least 50 per cent of the corporation’
s 
total value. 
A tax credit is available to foreign corporations engaged in 
a US business for foreign income taxes paid or accrued on their foreign source effectively connected income. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.3/page 3

--- Page 722/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
15.3.2 Residence 
For US corporate income tax purposes, a company’s country of incorporation rather than residency is used to determine income tax liability. 15.3.3 Taxation of income and gains 
The regular US corporate tax rates are progressive for the ﬁrst $100,000 of income, ranging from 15 per cent to 34 per cent. The tax rate increases to 39 per cent for income above $100,000 up to $335,000 and returns to 34 per cent for income in excess of $335,000 but less than $10 million. Income above $10 million is taxed at a rate of 35 per cent. 
In addition to the regular US corporate income tax, foreign 
corporations conducting business in the United States are sub-ject to a 30 per cent branch proﬁts tax and a 30 per cent branch-level interest tax. These taxes attempt to equalise the taxation of income earned by US branches with income earned by foreign-owned US subsidiaries. Foreign corporations are subject to a 30 per cent branch proﬁts tax on after
-tax earnings 
connected with a US branch to the extent such earnings are not reinvested in the US branch. Foreign corporations are also subject to a 30 per cent tax on interest paid by the US branch and certain additional interest that is deductible against the branch’s effectively connected income. The branch proﬁts tax or the branch-level interest tax may be reduced or eliminated by a tax treaty. 
Corporations may be liable for the alternative minimum 
tax (AMT). The 
AMT is calculated separately from the regular 
US corporate tax. Taxpayers pay the AMT in excess of the regular corporate tax. The AMT is intended to ensure that corpora-tions with substantial economic income pay some minimum amount of US tax. The 
AMT is a ﬂat rate tax of 20 per cent for 
corporations reduced by the AMT foreign tax credit for the taxable year. 
Capital gains realised by corporations are currently taxed at 
a maximum rate of 35 per cent. Capital losses may only offset capital gains. Capital losses in excess of capital gains can be carried back three years and carried forward ﬁve years. 
Net operating losses from US business activities can gener-
ally be carried back 2 years and carried forward 20 years in com-puting income subject to US tax. 
15.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 723/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
15.3.4 Treaties 
The United States has income tax treaties in effect with the following countries: Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Barbados Belarus Belgium Canada China (People’
s 
Republic of ) 
Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Ireland, Republic of Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Kazakhstan Korea, Republic of Kyrgystan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Mexico Moldova Morocco 
Netherlands 
New Zealand Norway 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania Russia 
Slovak Republic 
Slovenia South Africa 
Spain Sweden 
Switzerland 
T
ajikistan 
Thailand 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tunisia 
Turkey Turkmenistan 
Ukraine United Kingdom 
Uzbekistan 
Venezuela 
The United States also has income tax treaties in effect with 
Aruba, Bermuda, and the Netherlands 
Antilles that apply to 
limited items. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.3/page 5

--- Page 724/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
15.3.5 Administration 
US corporations are required to ﬁle an annual income tax return. 
Foreign corporations engaged in US business, or that have 
a permanent establishment in the US, any time during the tax year must ﬁle an annual income tax return. This rule applies even if the foreign corporation has no net income that is effec-tively connected with its US business. A foreign corporation that fails to make a timely return may not be able to receive the beneﬁt of most of the deduction and credits otherwise allowed to it under the code. 
Foreign corporations not engaged in US business at anytime 
during the tax year generally are not required to ﬁle an annual return if their US tax liability for the year is fully satisﬁed by US withholding taxes on income from US sources. 
A foreign corpo-
ration must ﬁle a return, however, for any year in which it claims treaty beneﬁts or seeks a refund. 
Foreign corporations engaged in US trade or business and 
US corporations that are at least 25 per cent owned (by vote or value) by foreign persons must ﬁle an annual information return reporting information about certain foreign related party trans-actions and must keep records concerning these transactions. 15.3.6 Special considerations for oil traders 
Foreign corporations trading in commodities through a resident broker
, commission agent, custodian, or other independent agent 
are not considered to be engaged in a US business as long as the foreign corporation does not have a US ofﬁce through which the commodity transactions are effected. 
Foreign corporations trading in commodities for their own 
account, regardless of how the trades are effected, are not con-sidered to be engaged in a US business even if the foreign cor-poration has a US ofﬁce. This exception, however, does not apply to foreign corporations that are dealers in commodities. In order for a foreign corporation to qualify for this exception, the com-modities must be of a kind customarily dealt in on an organised commodities exchange and the transaction must be of a kind cus-tomarily consummated on such an exchange. 
A foreign corporation taxable in the US that is a commod-
ities trader may elect to report gains and losses from certain com-modities and related contracts held at the close of the taxable year under a mark-to-market system. Under this system, the commodities and related contracts on hand at the end of the year are treated as sold for fair market value on the last business day 
15.3/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 725/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
of the year. Any gain or loss on the contracts subject to this elec-tive mark-to-market system is treated as ordinary gain or loss. Commodities and related contracts subject to this mark-to-market regime include actively traded commodities, notional principal contracts with respect to an actively traded commodity
, 
any evidence of an interest in, or derivative interest in, any actively traded commodity, including any option, forward con-tract, futures contract, short position, and any similar interest in such a commodity
. Once made, this election can be revoked only 
with IRS consent. 
A foreign corporation subject to US taxation that does not 
elect the broad mark-to-market treatment discussed above must nevertheless report gains and losses from regulated futures con-tracts and non-equity options held at the close of the taxable year on a mark-to-market basis. Under this more limited mark-to-market regime, the regulated futures contracts and non-equity options on hand at the end of the year are treated as sold for fair market value on the last business day of the year
, and gain or 
loss recognised on such contracts is treated as 40 per cent short term capital gain or loss and 60 per cent long term capital gain or loss. 
Oil traders may also be subject to loss deferral rules on 
certain straddle transactions. Generally
, the straddle rules 
require that losses realised on one leg of a straddle be deferred until the gain on the offsetting leg is recognised. A straddle gen-erally is deﬁned as offsetting positions with respect to actively traded personal property
. Certain hedging transactions are not 
subject to this loss deferral rule. 
As with most tax jurisdictions the US has transfer pricing 
rules for transactions between related parties. It is, however
, pos-
sible to obtain advance rulings in the US that could cover how proﬁts from a global trading activity will be allocated to the various taxing jurisdictions for US tax purposes. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.3/page 7

--- Page 726/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 727/964 ---
15.4 Singapore 
Alain Ahkong, Pioneer Associates Ltd. Singapore is the third largest oil trading centre in the world today
, after New York and London. It is also the most important 
oil trading centre in the Asia–Paciﬁc region. 
There are many factors which have contributed to the 
success of Singapore as a leading oil trading centre. Most notably is its ideal location at the tip of the Malayan Peninsula which provides for the close proximity to the major oil producers and markets in the 
Asia–Paciﬁc region. The major oil producers in 
the region include Malaysia, Indonesia, China and Brunei, and the major markets comprise Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Australia and India. The Singapore government is also commit-ted to making Singapore an international oil trading centre. It introduced the 
Approved Oil Trader tax incentive scheme in 1989 
and is committed to broadening the range of contracts (including energy futures) on the Singapore International Monetary Exchange (now part of the Singapore Exchange). 
With effect from June 2001, the Approved Oil Trader Scheme 
was merged with the 
Approved International Trader Scheme – a 
similar scheme for trading in approved commodities and prod-ucts – known as the Global Trader Programme. The beneﬁts of the programme remain the same. 
The physical trading of crude and ﬁnished petroleum 
products has been the backbone of the oil trading market in Singapore. However
, the recent inﬂux of oil brokers into 
Singapore has resulted in a growth of the paper market. Whilst the physical business conducted by the international oil traders should continue to increase signiﬁcantly, the growth of the paper market is expected to outpace the physical market in the longer term. 
There are currently more than 100 oil traders in Singapore 
and the list continues to grow
. These traders range from the oil 
majors and reﬁners to independents and Japanese trading houses. In view of the Singapore government’s actions to promote the oil and gas industry an increasing number of companies are expected to expand their oil trading operations into Singapore. As a result, the income tax laws and the taxation of oil trading in Singapore will invariably be important issues on the agenda of these companies. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.4/page 1

--- Page 728/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
15.4.1 Scope of tax 
Singapore income tax is imposed on a resident company in respect of: 
(i) income accruing in or derived from Singapore, and 
(ii) income received in Singapore from outside Singapore 
(i.e. foreign source income received in or remitted toSingapore). 
There is no capital gains tax in Singapore. However, gains from short-term real property transactions and gains from short-term transactions of shares in private real property companies are deemed to be “income” and chargeable to income tax. 
A foreign source income is deemed to be received in 
Singapore from outside Singapore where: 
(a) it 	 is remitted to, transmitted or brought into 
Singapore; 
(b) it is applied in or towards satisfaction of any debt 
incurred in respect of a trade or business carried on in Singapore; and 
(c) it is applied to purchase any moveable property which 
is brought into Singapore. 
A non-resident company carrying on business in Singapore 
through a branch is taxable on income accruing or derived from Singapore. It may also be taxed on income received in Singapore from outside Singapore only to the extent that the offshore income is directly attributable to the branch’
s operations. 
15.4.2 Residence 
For Singapore income tax purposes, a company is resident in Sin-gapore if the control and management of its business is exercised in Singapore. The country of incorporation is not decisive in this respect. Generally
, control and management is considered to be 
exercised at the place where the Board of Directors meetings are regularly held and important decisions taken. 
A foreign company carrying on business in Singapore 
through a branch ofﬁce is not likely to be considered resident in Singapore since the directors of the foreign company would in most cases exercise control and management outside Singapore. 15.4.3 Taxation of income and gains 
For the Year of Assessment 2001, the corporate tax rate in Singapore is 25.5 per cent. W
ith effect from the Year of Assess-
15.4/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 729/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
ment 2002, the rate is reduced by 25.5 per cent with the follow-ing tax exemptions: 
(a) three-quarters of up to the ﬁrst S$10,000 of a 
company’
s chargeable income; and 
(b) one-half of the next S$90,000. 
Thus, the effective corporate tax rate in the Year of Assessment 2002 is as follows: 
Tax on ﬁrst S$10,000 6.125% 
Tax on next S$90,000 12.25% 
Tax on income exceeding S$100,000 24.5% 
Trading losses can be carried forward to be utilised against future years’ 
proﬁts so long as the company meets the “substantial 
shareholders” test, that is, there is no more than a 50 per cent change in the shareholders and their shareholdings in the company as on the last day of the calendar year in which the losses arose compared with the ﬁrst day of the year of assessment in which the losses are utilised. 
Where a company fails to meet the above test, it may 
apply for a ministerial waiver if it can substantiate that the change in shareholders and their shareholdings was due to legit-imate purposes not motivated by tax considerations. Under such circumstances, the losses can only be set off against proﬁts from the same trade or business in respect of which that loss was incurred. 15.4.4 Differing types of entities 
Representative ofﬁces of non-Singaporean companies Foreign companies that have been granted procedural approval from the Singapore T
rade Development Board to set up repre-
sentative ofﬁces in Singapore are not permitted to undertake any business transactions in Singapore, including the conclusion of contracts and opening or negotiating letters of credit directly or indirectly on behalf of its head ofﬁce. They have no legal corpo-rate status in Singapore. A representative ofﬁce’s activities are strictly conﬁned to promotional and liaison work for its head ofﬁce. It is not therefore subject to Singapore tax. 
Foreign companies are required to renew their representa-
tive ofﬁce status annually. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.4/page 3

--- Page 730/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Singapore branch 
The chargeable proﬁts of a Singapore branch are subject to tax at the same tax rate applicable to companies ( see Section 
15.4.3 above ). 
There is no withholding tax on the remittance of branch 
proﬁts. Singapore subsidiary There is no withholding tax on dividends. Singapore operates a full imputation system. Under Section 44 of the Singapore Income T
ax Act the income tax paid by a company resident in 
Singapore on its proﬁts is fully passed on or imputed to the share-holders on payment of a dividend. 
For a Singapore resident company, the amount of tax at 
the prevailing corporate tax rate deemed paid on the dividends to its shareholders may be credited against the shareholder 
’s tax 
liability and any excess deemed tax credit is refundable. Divi-dends paid out of tax exempt proﬁts or proﬁts which have been subject to a reduced tax rate are not subject to the provisions of Section 44 and can be paid to the shareholders free of Singapore tax. 
The provisions of Section 44 also do not apply to dividends 
paid by a Singapore resident company out of certain foreign income for which tax credit has been allowed against the Singapore tax payable. 
A portion of the foreign income (computed in accordance with 
a prescribed formula) is credited to a special account and divi-dends paid out of the foreign income credited to this account are exempt in the hands of shareholders. Where the recipient of the tax exempt dividends is a Singapore holding company owning 50 per cent or more of the beneﬁcial interest in the issued share capital of the Singapore resident company at the time it receives the tax exempt dividends, it can in turn distribute tax exempt dividends out of such tax exempt income to its shareholders. The “50 per cent” criteria may be relaxed under certain circumstances. 
The tax exemption does not apply to dividends paid to 
holders of preference shares. 
Singapore service company A foreign company may incorporate a Singapore subsidiary which provides services in the normal course of its business for a fee. 
15.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 731/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
The service company would provide administrative and 
information gathering services and would seek potential cus-tomers. Such a company cannot conclude contracts or control the pricing of products if it is to be a service company
. Under current 
practice the Singapore tax authorities expect a minimum taxable income based on 5 per cent of the cost of providing the services. 15.4.5 Treaties 
Singapore has concluded double tax treaties with the following countries: Australia Indonesia Philippines 
Bangladesh Israel Poland 
Belgium Italy Portugal 
Bulgaria Japan South Africa 
Burma Latvia South Korea 
(Myanmar) Luxembourg Sri Lanka 
Canada Malaysia Sweden 
China (PRC) Mauritius Switzerland 
Cyprus Mexico T
aiwan (ROC) 
Czech Republic Netherlands Thailand Denmark New Zealand United Arab 
Egypt* Norway Emirates 
Finland Oman United Kingdom 
France Pakistan Vietnam 
Germany Papua New 
Hungary Guinea 
India * awaiting ratiﬁcation 
Singapore has also concluded an agreement on mutual tax 
exemption with: 
•	USA – on income derived from international operation of ships or aircraft; 
•	Saudi Arabia – on income arising from the business of international air transport; 
•	United Arab Emirates – on income arising from the business of international air transport; 
•	Chile – on income arising from international operation of ships; 
•	Bahrain – on income arising from the business of inter-national air transport; and 
•	Oman – on income arising from the business of inter-national air transport. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.4/page 5

--- Page 732/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Residents of Singapore are eligible to enjoy the beneﬁts accorded 
under the various treaties. 
15.4.6 Administration 
The Singapore tax year (known as the year of assessment) is the calendar year
. The basis of assessment is the preceding calendar 
year’s income. In the case of proﬁts derived from a trade or busi-ness, where the accounts are made up to a day other than Decem-ber 31, the proﬁts assessable in a year of assessment from that trade or business are based on the accounts ending in the pre-ceding year. 15.4.7 Special incentives for oil traders 
In order to further encourage the growth of the Singapore oil trading industry and to encourage international oil trading com-panies to base their regional operations in Singapore, the Approved Oil T
raders (AOT) Tax Incentive Scheme was intro-
duced on 1 January 1989. The Minister of Finance has issued The Income T
ax (Concessionary Rate of Tax for Approved Oil Trading 
Companies) Regulations 1992 in respect of the incentive. To date, 54 companies have been granted the AOT tax incentive. The features of the AOT tax incentive which is administered by the Singapore Trade Development Board are currently as follows: Tax beneﬁts 
•	Companies (both Singapore incorporated companies or 
branches of foreign companies) granted the status of Approved Oil T
rader (AOT) are subject to a tax rate 
of 10 per cent on qualifying income from qualifying trading activities in approved oil products with non-residents and other AOTs. 
•	An approved AOT is not subject to the imputation system in respect of dividends paid to holders of shares of a non-preferential nature, out of income which has been taxed at the concessionary tax rate of 10 per cent. 
Note: Dividends paid to holders of shares of a pref-
erential nature are subject to the imputation system where the 
AOT is resident in Singapore. 
•	The incentive granted will be for an initial period not exceeding 5 years and may be extended for such further periods, not exceeding 5 years at any one time, on a case by case basis. 
15.4/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 733/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
Qualifying criteria Minimum requirements Potential AOT companies will be assessed on their trading head-quarter functions and activities, world-wide networks and per-formance track record. In addition, the following factors will be taken into account: 
1.	annual turnover; 
2.	total business spending; 
3.	number of experienced oil trading professionals; 
4.	the quantum of its capital funds; 
5.	use of banking and other ancillary ﬁnancial services in Singapore; 
6.	use of Singapore’s trade infrastructure; 
7.	use of Singapore as a centre of arbitration in case of disputes in its international trade; 
8.	its contribution to the success of the oil futures market. 
Qualifying income from qualifying activities Qualifying income The qualifying income is deﬁned as: 
1.	proﬁts from qualifying transactions; and 
2.	commission and fees from acting as a broker in physi-cal trading between any of the following persons: 
•	an AOT; 
•	a person who carries on the business of petroleum 
reﬁning in Singapore; 
•	a person who is neither a resident of nor has a per-
manent establishment in Singapore; or 
•	a branch ofﬁce outside Singapore of a company res-
ident in Singapore; 
but excludes any income attributable to activities carried out in Singapore which add value to the petroleum or petroleum product by any physical alteration, addition or improvement, including reﬁning and blending. Qualifying transactions Qualifying transactions for purposes of the Regulations are any of the following transactions carried out by an 
AOT in currencies 
other than Singapore dollars: 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.4/page 7

--- Page 734/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
(a) Physical trading, i.e. trading in petroleum or any 
petroleum product on a spot or forward basis where the intention of the parties at the time of the transac
-
tion is that actual delivery of the petroleum or petro-leum product is required, whether or not it is actually made, and where the petroleum or petroleum product is purchased by an 
AOT from and sold to: 
•	another AOT; 
•	a person who carries on the business of reﬁning petroleum in Singapore; 
•	a person who is neither a resident of nor has a per-manent establishment in Singapore; or 
•	a branch ofﬁce outside Singapore of a company res-ident in Singapore; 
but excludes any transaction in which the petroleum or petroleum product is purchased for the purposes of consumption in Singapore or for the supply of fuel to aircraft or vessels within Singapore. 
(b) Petroleum futures trading, i.e. trading in futures con-tracts or options in petroleum or petroleum product on any exchange speciﬁed in the Regulations of the Singapore Income T
ax Act carried out by an AOT in 
accordance with the rules and regulations or customs and practices of that exchange with: •	an Asian Currency Unit of a ﬁnancial institution; 
•	a member of the Singapore International Monetary Exchange; 
•	a person who is neither a resident of nor has a per-manent establishment in Singapore; 
•	a branch ofﬁce outside Singapore of a company res-ident in Singapore; or 
• another AOT company.
Note: The exchanges currently speciﬁed in the Regu
 -
lations are as follows:
(i) International Petroleum Exchange
(ii) New York Mercantile Exchange
(iii) Singapore International Monetary Exchange
(c) Over the counter (OTC) hedging, i.e. any transaction, other than a transaction carried out on any speciﬁed exchange, in petroleum swaps or options including caps, collars, ﬂoors and swap options, where: •	the consideration or other payment in the transac-tion is calculated on the basis of the price of petro-leum or any petroleum products; 
15.4/page 8	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 735/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
•	the transaction is in connection with and incidental to any physical trading; and 
•	the transaction is carried out by an AOT company with: 
–	another AOT company; 
–	a person who carries on the business of reﬁning 
petroleum in Singapore; 
–	a person who is neither a resident of nor has a 
permanent establishment in Singapore; 
–	a branch ofﬁce outside Singapore of a company 
resident in Singapore; or 
–	an Asian Currency Unit of a ﬁnancial institution. 
Approved products Qualifying petroleum products for the purposes of the Regula-tions are crude oil, asphalt or bitumen, aviation fuel, diesel oil or gas oil, fuel oil, fuel oil components, gasoline, gasoline compo-nents, heating oil, kerosene, liqueﬁed natural gas, liqueﬁed petro-leum gas, low sulphur waxy residue, lube basestock or its derivatives, naphtha, parafﬁn wax and sulphur
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 15.4/page 9

--- Page 736/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 737/964 ---
15.5 United Kingdom taxation of 
trading instruments 
Oil traders can use a number of different types of ﬁnancial instruments in their trading activities. The most common would be options, futures, swaps, term contracts and forward contracts as set out in the earlier chapters of this manual. The UK tax system does not deal easily with any of these transactions, as they are fairly new on the commercial horizon, unless they are undertaken as part of a trade in such ﬁnancial instruments. Taxation of these instruments in the UK has, therefore, deve-loped in accordance with agreed practices and Inland Revenue concessions. 
Sections 15.5.1 to 15.5.3 describe the general PRT and cor-
poration tax treatments of trading instruments. Where the posi-tion is potentially different for speciﬁc instruments the treatment is described in Sections 15.5.4 to 15.5.7. 15.5.1 Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT) 
PRT is not chargeable on the proﬁts derived from ﬁnancial or trading instruments and can be disregarded for the taxation of oil trading activities (but see Section 15.6 on the impact of valuation for PRT purposes). Its impact has, however
, to be borne 
in mind by traders seeking to hedge group exposures. 15.5.2 Corporation Tax 
General The corporation tax legislation does not adequately cover the use of trading instruments related to commodities, and the Inland Revenue consider that the tax consequences of each transaction depend on the speciﬁc circumstances and the motive for entering into the transaction. 
If oil trading instruments are regularly entered into as part 
of a separate trading activity
, all of the gains and losses will be 
treated as taxable or allowable as ordinary income. For pure oil trading companies, where this is their only activity, this is fairly easy to establish, but for oil companies who have an oil trading group the Inland Revenue are generally reluctant to recognise a separate trading activity. In this case, the rules regarding taxa-bility are far from clear. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.5/page 1

--- Page 738/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Because of this, the Inland Revenue have issued a Statement 
of Practice (14/1991) which gives some guidance regarding the general treatment of trading instruments. 
Where the instrument has been entered into in connection 
with an underlying revenue transaction, the tax treatment of the instrument will be revenue in nature. Thus, for example, an oil company may hedge against the sale of its equity production and protect against a possible fall in price. The gain or loss on this instrument will then be treated as part of its general trading income ( see, however, the ring fence rules below ). 
However, whilst the treatment of an instrument taken out 
in connection with a speciﬁed volume of oil should fall within the revenue category
, this may not be the case where the volume of 
oil covered by the ﬁnancial instrument is far in excess of the company’s equity production or there is no direct match with an underlying transaction. In this case capital gains tax treatment is the most likely outcome. 15.5.3 The ring fence 
A “ring fence” is placed around certain UK oil and gas activities covering most upstream operations conducted under UK licences. These ring fence activities are treated as a separate trade for all corporation tax purposes. The rules are designed to prevent reliefs and allowances from non-“upstream” activities being used against upstream proﬁts. Thus, ring fence losses may be used to offset proﬁts from non-ring fence activities, but losses from non-ring fence activities (which include most downstream operations including trading) may not be used to offset ring fence proﬁts. 
It is important, therefore, that costs incurred in connection 
with upstream activities achieve a ring fence tax deduction. Gains and losses on ﬁnancial instruments would not normally be treated as part of the ring fence proﬁts but providing a connec-tion can be demonstrated ring fence tax treatment is achievable. 15.5.4 Capital gains 
If an instrument is marketable and is not quoted on the stock market, a disposal or abandonment prior to its maturity will be a chargeable event for capital gains tax purposes. The wasting asset rules apply so that the base cost of the instrument is depre-ciated on a straight line basis over its life. 15.5.5 Spot and forward contracts 
No speciﬁc rules apply for corporation tax purposes and the general rules described above will apply
. 
15.5/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 739/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
For VAT purposes, these contracts are for the supply of 
goods. The place of supply will be where the goods are located at delivery/appropriation. Thus, if they are in the UK they will be within the scope of VAT. Tax will be due at the standard rate unless: 
(i) the goods are subject to duty and are sold in bond. This can potentially apply to crude oil or reﬁned products but not gas. In the case of imported goods V
AT is only 
paid if or when they are removed from bond. For goods produced in bond (e.g. after UK reﬁning) all supplies in bond are disregarded except the last which is taxable; or 
(ii) the goods are sold for export when the zero rate applies. This does, however
, require proof of export and 
the seller must usually be the person arranging ship-ment abroad. 
Goods sold abroad to which (i) above applies will still strictly be supplied outside the UK. 15.5.6 Futures contracts 
No speciﬁc rules apply for corporation tax purposes and the general rules described above will apply
. 
For VAT, a futures contract for a physical commodity is also 
a contract for the supply of goods, provided that the contract can technically go to delivery
, notwithstanding that the vast major-
ity of such contracts do not go to delivery. The supply will take place where the goods are located at the time the supply takes place. In most cases, as a matter of practice Customs and Excise take this to be in the country in which the exchange on which they are traded is situated. IPE cargoes of gasoil are, for example, often loaded outside the UK in, say
, Rotterdam but the supply 
will be treated as a matter of practice as being made in the UK. 
Cash-settled futures contracts, which cannot technically go 
to delivery
, are essentially exempt for VAT and are treated as sup-
plies of ﬁnancial services with the same treatment as ﬁnancial futures. The rules for determining the value of the supply can be complicated. 15.5.7 Options 
Options can be treated as capital gains tax assets in certain cir-cumstances, but if the option is taken out in respect of a trading 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.5/page 3

--- Page 740/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
item the rules in the Statement of Practice (14/1991) outlined 
above should apply. Gains or losses on an option taken out as part of a genuine oil trading activity would normally be treated as part of the trading proﬁt or loss of the company. 
If an upstream production company used options to hedge 
its selling price of crude oil or gas, it is unlikely that the Oil Taxation Ofﬁce would accept the option price as being applicable for PRT or ring fence corporation tax purposes unless speciﬁc agreement had previously been made. 
In VAT terms, options, whether traded or over the counter, 
are supplies of ﬁnancial services. Contracts for oil or oil products will be essentially taxable at the standard rate of 17.5 per cent unless the buyer (if a business) is established outside the UK or Isle of Man or otherwise outside the European Union. Similarly options acquired from someone outside the UK are taxed at 17.5 per cent on a self-supply basis. T
raded options on UK exchanges 
such as the IPE may be zero rated if one of the parties is a member of the exchange. Options related to ﬁnancial futures con-tracts on the other hand are normally exempt from VAT with a consequent possible restriction on the amount of input V
AT to be 
recovered. 15.5.8 Swaps 
The treatment of ﬁnancial swap transactions, such as interest rate swaps or currency swaps, are subject to the regimes for the corporate tax treatment of foreign exchange gains and losses and ﬁnancial instruments which are effective for accounting periods commencing after 23 March 1995. Whilst the legislation does not speciﬁcally deal with the distinction between ring fence and non-ring fence transactions, it generally follows the principles out-lined above and thus the previous treatment is likely to continue. 
Although the Oil Taxation Ofﬁce is generally reluctant to 
accept that ﬁnancing transactions fall within the ring fence, it is possible to get a prior agreement with the Revenue that, provided the transaction is demonstrably a hedge against a borrowing which falls within the ring fence, the proﬁt or loss on the swap transaction will also be treated as within the ring fence. 
Swaps in the oil trading sense, i.e. exchanges of cargoes of 
different crudes with or without a price differential are not within the new legislation, but any proﬁt or loss would normally be treated as part of the trading activity of the company
. For an 
upstream company swapping its own production, the disposal will be treated as a non-arm’s length disposal such that the Oil Taxation Ofﬁce market value has to be brought into account for 
15.5/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 741/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
both PRT and ring fence corporation tax purposes. Any proﬁt or loss on the acquisition and subsequent disposal of the other half of the swap would not be within the PRT net and would be treated as a non-ring fence gain or loss for corporation tax purposes. 
As the essence of a swap contract is the hedging of a price 
variation in the underlying product and given that the contracts are based on deemed purchases and sales, the treatment for V
AT 
purposes is as an exempt ﬁnancial service. The supply is recog-nised to the extent that money is received. It can be zero rated if the paying counterpart is established outside the European Community
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.5/page 5

--- Page 742/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 743/964 ---
15.6 The UK PRT nomination 
scheme 
15.6.1 Outline 
A major inﬂuence on oil trading in the UK is the PRT Nomina-tion Scheme. The scheme was introduced in 1987 to counter per-ceived abuses by the majors, but impacts all companies ( S.61 & 
Schedule 10 F
A 1987 ). The scheme primarily inﬂuences traders 
in oil companies that are selling the group’s equity crude. 
Production of oil (and gas) is subject to PRT, in simple terms, 
on the market value of the oil produced. For third party arm’
s 
length sales, this will be the price achieved, but for other dis-posals a deemed market value is applied. To avoid companies abusing the system, if companies wish their third party crude sales to be taxed at the price achieved, rather than the deemed market value, the general rule is that the sales contract must be notiﬁed (nominated) to the Oil T
axation Ofﬁce (OTO) of the 
Inland Revenue by 5 pm on the next business day after which the main terms of the contract are agreed by the traders ( S.61 & 
Schedule 10 FA 1987 ). In practice, traders employed by oil com-
panies to, inter alia , sell the group’
 s equity production will need 
to be familiar with these rules. These rules currently only apply to sales of crude oil. 
The deemed market price applied to all other disposals of 
crude is computed by the OTO based on third party sales data which is available to them. T 
o this end, all UK oil companies and 
any of their world-wide afﬁliates can be required to supply details of all relevant transactions in UK crudes and traders who are part of oil producing groups clearly need to have systems in place to produce such data. 
Only arm’s length sales may be nominated. For non-arm’s 
length sales the OTO market value price will automatically apply
. 
For these purposes an arm’s length sale is deﬁned in the Oil Tax Acts as broadly one under a contract where the contract price is the sole consideration for the sale, the terms of which are not affected by any other commercial relationship between buyer and seller or their afﬁliates, and the seller has no interest in the sub-sequent resale of the product or any by-product. 
Where arm’s length sales are made under a long-term 
formula priced contract it is possible to nominate the contract itself, as opposed to each individual sale, under a “composite nom-ination” such that all sales under the contract will be treated as being nominated. 
A composite nomination can, however, only 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.6/page 1

--- Page 744/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
cover a maximum of two chargeable periods, and, therefore must 
be repeated at least annually. Similarly, should the terms of the contract be changed, a new composite nomination must be made. A long-term ﬁxed price contract has, however, to be nominated when it is entered into on the same basis as a one-off spot sale. 
A revision to the Nomination Scheme was introduced in 
December 1991 which permits companies to “opt out” of the scheme if they always sell on an arm’s length basis and do not trade anything other than their own equity production. The “opt out” scheme was amended as from 1 January 1994 such that com-panies must notify the wish to “opt out” before the start of the chargeable period to enable companies to “opt back in” to the scheme from the point when they no longer fulﬁl the criteria for “opting out”. 15.6.2 Calculation of market value 
Where a company sells its equity production otherwise than at arm’
s length (e.g. to an afﬁliate), a market value is imputed for 
tax purposes. A single market value for each blend of crude is arrived at for each month and applied to all relevant deliveries in that month. The market value of Brent crude is derived from a database maintained by the Oil Taxation Ofﬁce and the source data consists of the prices realised on all known third party sales in that crude (from all sources), on contracts struck over a period commencing at the beginning of the calendar month prior to the delivery month and end in the middle of the delivery month; the 45 day period. 
A weighted average price is arrived at for each day in the 45 
day period and a simple average of all those prices gives the market value for that month. In a situation where the crude is not heavily traded and hence there is not enough data to compute a market value as described, the Brent database is used with the prices for other crudes being arrived at by adding or subtracting a market differential. Contracts based on trigger prices can distort the database since the trigger may be a future price level but the OTO database will bring in the eventual price gained as being achieved on the day of contract. The OTO have stated that they are continuing to keep these areas under review
. 
15.6.3 Tracking the database 
A trader in Brent can track the OTO database with reasonable accuracy (subject to there not being too many trigger deals) and may well be able to take a view before the end of the 45 day period 
15.6/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 745/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
as to whether to sell an equity cargo to a third party or dispose of it on a non-arm’s length basis. 
In a falling market the trader would usually want to sell the 
cargo to a third party so that the actual price will stand for tax purposes. In this latter event details of the contract have to be notiﬁed to the OTO by 5 
pm on the next business day after the 
sale was agreed under the nomination scheme, and if notiﬁcation is not made then the higher of market value or the actual reali-sation is used as the taxable income. 
In a rising market, there is an incentive for the trader to 
dispose of a cargo on a non-arm’
s length basis since the price 
derived from the 45 day database will be lower than the price which would be achieved on a sale towards the end of the period. 
The tax system could therefore encourage companies to put 
more volumes into the market where prices are falling and with-draw them from the market when prices are rising. 15.6.4 The Revenue’s response 
There are anti-avoidance provisions (which have not been acti-vated) which could potentially levy tax on a “penalty” valuation to the extent that there are both nominated equity deliveries in a month and other equity deliveries in the same month. There are, however
, provisions protecting crude to be used for reﬁning 
within the group. The provisions will only apply if, and when, the Government choose to activate them and are not currently believed to act very much as a deterrent against traders picking and choosing selling alternatives. 
Most companies in the UK are conscious of the need not to 
abuse the current valuation system since tax legislation in the UK is likely to change again if the UK Revenue do not believe that they are collecting tax on a representative market value. However
, where the market is particularly volatile there is a 
strong incentive for companies to use the ﬂexibility in the tax system to maximum advantage and when it becomes known that some companies are seeking to maximise their after-tax return, others follow to maintain their competitive positions. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 15.6/page 3

--- Page 746/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 747/964 ---
Appendix 15.1 
Articles from the OECD model tax treaty Permanent establishment 
1.	For the purposes of this Convention, the term “per-
manent establishment” means a ﬁxed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. 
2.	The term “permanent establishment” includes especially: 
(a) a place of management; 
(b) a branch; 
(c) an ofﬁce; 
(d) a factory; 
(e) a workshop; and 
(f ) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other 
place of extraction of natural resources. 
3.	A building site or construction or installation project constitutes a permanent establishment only if it lasts more than twelve months. 
4.	Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term “permanent establishment” shall be deemed not to include: (a) the use of facilities solely for the purpose of 
storage, display or delivery of goods or merchan-dise belonging to the enterprise; 
(b) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchan-
dise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery; 
(c) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchan-
dise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of processing by another enterprise; 
(d) the maintenance of a ﬁxed place of business solely 
for the purpose of purchasing goods or merchan-dise or of collecting information, for the enterprise; 
(e) the maintenance of a ﬁxed place of business solely 
for the purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character; 
(f ) the maintenance of a ﬁxed place of business solely 
for any combination of activities mentioned in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e), provided that the overall 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 Appendix 15.1/page 1

--- Page 748/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
activity of the ﬁxed place of business resulting from 
this combination is of a preparatory or auxiliary character. 
5.	Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, where a person – other than an agent of an independ-ent status to whom paragraph 6 applies – is acting on behalf of an enterprise and has, and habitually exer-cises, in a Contracting State an authority to conclude contracts in the name of the enterprise, that enterprise shall be deemed to have a permanent establishment in that State in respect of any activities which that person undertakes for the enterprise, unless the activ-ities of such person are limited to those mentioned in paragraph 4 which, if exercised through a ﬁxed place of business, would not make this ﬁxed place of busi-ness a permanent establishment under the provisions of that paragraph. 
6.	An enterprise shall not be deemed to have a perma-nent establishment in a Contracting State merely because it carries on business in that State through a broker
, general commission agent or any other agent 
of an independent status, provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of their business. 
7.	The fact that a company which is a resident of a Con-tracting State controls or is controlled by a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which carries on business in that other State (whether through a permanent establishment or otherwise), shall not of itself constitute either company a perma-nent establishment of the other. 
Business proﬁts 
1.	The proﬁts of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that State unless the enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein. If the enterprise carries on business as aforesaid, the proﬁts of the enterprise may be taxed in the other State but only so much of them as is attributable to that permanent establishment. 
2.	Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, where an enterprise of a Contracting State carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein, there shall in each 
Appendix 15.1/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 749/964 ---
15 Taxation of oil trading
Contracting State be attributed to that permanent establishment the proﬁts which it might be expected to make if it were a distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the same or similar conditions and dealing wholly inde-pendently with the enterprise of which it is a perma-nent establishment. 
3.	In determining the proﬁts of a permanent establish-ment, there shall be allowed as deductions expenses which are incurred for the purposes of the permanent establishment, including executive and general admin-istrative expenses so incurred, whether in the State in which the permanent establishment is situated or elsewhere. 
4.	Insofar as it has been customary in a Contracting State to determine the proﬁts to be attributed to a perma-nent establishment on the basis of an apportionment of the total proﬁts of the enterprise to its various parts, nothing in paragraph 2 shall preclude that Contract-ing state from determining the proﬁts to be taxed by such an apportionment as may be customary; the method of apportionment adopted shall, however
, be 
such that the result shall be in accordance with the principles contained in this Article. 
5.	No proﬁts shall be attributed to a permanent estab-lishment by reason of the mere purchase by that per-manent establishment of goods or merchandise for the enterprise. 
6.	For the purposes of the preceding paragraphs, the proﬁts to be attributed to the permanent establish-ment shall be determined by the same method year by year unless there is good and sufﬁcient reason to the contrary
. 
7.	Where proﬁts include items of income which are dealt with separately in other 
Articles of this Convention, 
then the provisions of those Articles shall not be affected by the provisions of this Article. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 Appendix 15.1/page 3

--- Page 750/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 751/964 ---
16 Contracts 
Denton Hall Updated by Malcolm Groom andDiyar Kanashev (Norton Rose) 
16.1 Introduction
16.2 General
16.2.1 Contract formation
16.2.2 Carriage contracts
16.2.3 Sale of goods
16.3 Express terms
16.3.1 Parties
16.3.2 Date
16.3.3 Deﬁnitions
16.3.4 Quality
16.3.5 Quantity
16.3.6 Price
16.3.7 Payment
16.3.8 Title and risk
16.3.9 Settlement or bookout
16.3.10 Delivery
16.3.11 Nominations
16.3.12 Transportation
16.3.13 Inspection and sampling
16.3.14 Force majeure
16.3.15 Restrictions
16.3.16 Duties and taxes
16.3.17 Assignment
16.3.18 Liability
16.3.19 Notices
16.3.20 Governing law and dispute resolution
16.3.21 Miscellaneous terms
16.4 Implied terms
16.4.1 UK Sale of Goods Act
16.4.2 Maritime legislation
16.4.3 The Vienna Convention
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 752/964 ---
16.5 Incorporated terms
16.5.1 Incoterms
16.5.2 Letters of credit
16.5.3 Pollution
Appendix 
16.1 Sample FOB contract (1)
16.2 Sample FOB contract (2)
16.3 Sample CIF contract
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 753/964 ---
16.1 Introduction 
Oil trading deals can be subject to unforeseen problems and dis-putes even when the parties are expert, reliable and have no wish to cheat each other
. The best way to avoid disputes is to conclude 
well-drafted, carefully designed contracts. 
Oil trading disputes typically arise in the following areas: •	Failure to lift 
•	Failure (or delay) to deliver 
•	Problems with documents (not available or not 
acceptable) 
•	Problems with the quality or quantity of oil (including 
measurement issues) 
•	Problems with transport 
•	Failure (or delay) of payment 
•	Disagreements over insurance 
•	Bankruptcy of one party 
•	Questions of ownership 
•	Payment of import duties 
•	Disagreements with brokers 
•	Disagreements over terms and conditions 
•	Sovereign Immunity (in transactions dealing with 
state entities). 
This chapter examines the key issues involved in drawing up oil trading contracts and looks at ways of reducing the risk and possibility of disputes by ensuring that contracts are properly drafted and agreed. It should not, however
, be construed as prof-
fering legal advice. 
The review of contract terms concentrates mainly on spot 
or term contracts for physical oil and does not cover forward or exchange contracts, which are typically standard and non-negotiable. However, it highlights any relevant points of com-parison with forward and exchange type contracts. Any views expressed about the examples of contract terms are those of the author and not those of the companies whose contracts are quoted in the chapter
. Any extracts quoted remain the copyright of the 
companies concerned. 
It is presumed throughout that the obligations are being 
assumed by the usual party
, either the buyer or the seller, in a 
sale and purchase transaction in accordance with standard prac-tice. Of course, the ultimate terms of any contract will depend on the facts of each case. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.1/page 1

--- Page 754/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 755/964 ---
16.2 General 
16.2.1 Contract formation 
The key to any deal is the negotiation and agreement of the con-tract terms and conditions that set out the rights and obligations of the parties involved. How
, when and where a contract is formed 
are crucial aspects of the transaction that can be neglected once the price is agreed. This can result in the two parties ending up with widely different perceptions of the nature of the agreement that they have just entered into. 
Oil trading contracts can be made in many different ways – 
either written or oral. However
, any contract must comply with 
certain essential requirements to ensure that it is legally binding and enforceable. The English law requirements for a valid con-tract are summarised as follows: 
(a) the parties must intend to enter into a legally binding 
contract. In the case of a commercial agreement such an intention will normally be presumed, however
, this 
presumption may be rebutted where the agreement expressly states there is no intention to create legal relations. Similarly if the document is a statement of government policy this may not amount to a contract but rather an expression of intention; 
(b) there must be an agreement, which comprises an offer 
and the acceptance of a promise. 
An offer has been 
deﬁned as “an expression of willingness to contract made with the intention (actual or apparent) that it shall become binding on the person making it as soon as it is accepted by the person to whom it is addressed” and an acceptance “is a ﬁnal and unqualiﬁed expres-sion of consent to the terms of an offer”.
1 Thus, under 
English law, a counter offer can never constitute an acceptance (as the mere making of a counter offer revokes the original offer); 
(c) consideration (meaning something of value) for that 
promise must be given by the promisee or must be received by the promisor
. If the promisee suffers a 
detriment at the promisor’s request but the promisee confers no corresponding beneﬁt on the promisor this 
1 Chitty on Contracts. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.2/page 1

--- Page 756/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
will still amount to consideration – for example by con -
ferring a beneﬁt on a third party at the promisor’s request. 
All these basic requirements may be applied to a standard physi-cal oil contract. For example, the seller, who is an oil producer (the promisor), and the purchaser
, who is an oil reﬁner (the 
promisee), intend to enter into a legally binding contract whereby the producer promises to deliver a cargo of crude oil to the reﬁner who has agreed to pay the producer for that cargo. However, it should be noted that offers can sometimes be made conditionally, for example, subject to speciﬁc circumstances or approval. In such cases, contracts are not binding if the conditions are not met unless the conditions are waived by the party imposing them. Since an oil contract need not be written – or in some cases where it is written, its terms are brief – the conduct of the parties is important in determining whether the contract exists. For example, acceptance of an offer may be by conduct. Acceptance is demonstrated where the purchaser accepts the cargo and uses the oil or, conversely, where the purchaser has offered to buy a cargo and the seller makes that supply. 
In oil trading, parties typically deal over the telephone and 
oral contracts agreed over the phone (followed by an exchange of telexes or conﬁrmation notes
2) are standard practice, especially 
in the forward, swaps or over-the-counter options markets. Gen-erally, traders will agree the key points (how much, when and what quantity) and may refer to a master agreement or standard terms. 
To ensure the validity and effectiveness of such oral deals, 
traders should: 
•	ensure a clear offer and a mirror acceptance (not a counter offer), 
•	agree a price, 
and should not leave anything to chance: 
•	make references to standard terms and conditions (provided that such standard terms are correctly and precisely identiﬁed), 
•	require conﬁrmation in writing or by fax, 
•	if possible, document or record the conversation. 
2 Telexes are probably the safest option, compared to e-mails or 
faxes where the potential of an interference with the documents is possible. 
16.2/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 757/964 ---
16 Contracts
It is important with oral contracts that a record is made not only so that there is an accurate record of all the agreed terms in the case of dispute, but also for the sake of clarity as there are often several conversations before a deal is ﬁnally agreed. 
As a cautionary note, traders should be aware that, even 
where there has been an offer and acceptance, the contract may still not be valid. For example: the offer may have been termi-nated because it has been revoked by the promisor or on the basis of a counter offer made by the promisee. In addition, while the bare essentials for the formation of a contract have been fulﬁlled, satisfaction of such requirements does not alone mean that the contract is effective and enforceable. Contracting parties should be aware that there are circumstances, for example, where there has been a mistake, misrepresentation, fraud, duress or undue inﬂuence, which may affect the validity or enforceability of the contract. The parties should also be aware of the potential appli-cability of other legislative developments, that are not embodied in UK legislation, which may raise issues of illegality of the con-cluded contracts (e.g. under the scope of rules of the International Securities Lending 
Association or trading and energy related leg-
islation, such as UN/US sanctions). 16.2.2 Carriage contracts 
This section does not provide a detailed examination of maritime law but highlights the types of contracts for carriage which may apply
. 
Spot and term contracts for the purchase of oil will often 
involve contracts for carriage by sea, evidenced by bills of lading or contained in charterparties. The most common form of sale contracts for carriage by sea are “FOB” (Free on Board) or “CIF” (Cost, Insurance and Freight) contracts.
3 In the UK, contracts for 
the sale of goods will also be subject to the terms of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 (as amended by the Sale and Supply of Goods Act 1994 and by the Sale of Goods (Amendment) Act 1995) as well as certain international conventions. Where the parties consider the extent of liability arising out of or in connection with the contract or contemplate conferring of certain rights to a third party the scope of applicability of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 and the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 should be taken into account. In addition, where an entity beneﬁting from an 
3 See Chapter 17 for commentary on Incoterms. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.2/page 3

--- Page 758/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
exclusive right or which is state-owned is involved, EU procure -
ment rules may need to be considered. 
The main distinction between FOB and CIF contracts can be 
summarised as follows: 
•	FOB: the seller normally puts goods on board a ship 
nominated by the buyer who charters (or reserves space on) a vessel; the buyer also arranges insurance. T
itle usually passes on shipment; 
•	CIF: the seller arranges freight for carriage of the goods and the insurance. The seller tenders the appro-priate shipping documents to the buyer, including a bill of lading and a certiﬁcate of insurance. T
itle nor-
mally passes on delivery of the shipping documents. 
The key features of bills of lading and charterparties are: 
•	A bill of lading is evidence of goods having been received by the carrier for shipment and is issued by the carrier to the shipper
. There may also be a char-
terparty in which case the bill of lading may act as a receipt. 
•	The bill of lading is – most importantly – a document of title. The carrier must deliver the cargo to the holder of the bill of lading and will commit the tort of wrong-ful interference with the goods if he delivers them to anyone else. If the buyer has no bill of lading, then he may be able to provide an indemnity to the carrier against which the carrier will deliver the goods. Simi-larly, because a bill of lading may arrive after the goods, it is common for the seller to issue a letter of indemnity that indemniﬁes the buyer against a failure to deliver documents with the buyer
’s payment ( see 
also Section 16.5.2 and Chapter 13 ). Carriage contracts 
evidenced by bills of lading are transferable. Pursuant to 2(1) of the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1992 (which came into effect on 16 September 1992) the holder of a bill of lading has the right to sue under the contract of carriage as if he had been a party to it. 
There are various types of charterparties but, unlike bills of lading, these are not documents of title and they are not trans-ferable. The most common types of charter contracts are: 
•	A time charter – to charter the ship for a period of time 
on payment of a hire charge. 
16.2/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 759/964 ---
16 Contracts
• A voyage charter – to charter the ship for carrying a
cargo which is discharged on payment of freight.
There are also various types of “hybrid” charter which have fea-tures of both time and voyage charters. 
Sometimes both a bill of lading and a charterparty may be 
entered into in respect of the same cargo, but different rights and obligations may arise under each document and therefore both documents will need to be considered when considering obliga-tions such as insurance and questions of liability. 16.2.3 Sale of goods 
Oil contracts may also fall within the scope of the UK Sale of Goods 
Act 1979 ( see also Section 16.4.1 ) in which case certain 
terms (concerning the quality of goods) will be deemed to be implied terms. Under the 1979 Act (as amended by the Sale and Supply of Goods Act 1994) it is implied that the goods are of “sat-isfactory quality” when sold and, in certain cases, ﬁt for the purpose for which they were bought. If the contract is not an “international supply contract”, liability for breach of such an implied term may only normally be excluded as far as it is rea-sonable to do so. In the case of an international sale of goods con-tract – which is not subject to any reasonableness test in the drafting of its exclusion clauses – a seller may still expressly exclude an implied term in respect of quality
. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.2/page 5

--- Page 760/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 761/964 ---
16.3 Express terms 
Apart from the basic requirements of contract formation, there are a number of fundamental terms that should be included expressly in a physical oil sales contract. In the case of a term 
contract, these would include: 
•	Parties 
•	Date 
•	Deﬁnitions 
•	Quality 
•	Quantity 
•	Price 
•	Payment 
•	Title and risk 
•	Settlement or bookout 
•	Delivery 
•	Nominations 
•	Transportation 
•	Inspection and sampling (including measurement and veriﬁcation of meters) 
•	Force majeure 
•	Restrictions 
•	Duties and taxes 
•	Assignment
4 
•	Liability5 
•	Notices 
•	Governing law and dispute resolution 
•	Miscellaneous terms (e.g. sovereign immunity, mini-mum quantity (e.g. take or pay type clause)). 
Such terms may also underlie other types of oil contract. Spot oil contracts would normally include a sub-set of the express terms listed above, in particular: parties, quality
, quantity, price, 
payment, title and risk, delivery, nominations, inspection and sampling, force majeure , governing law and dispute resolution 
(see sample contracts in Appendix to this chapter ). 
It is preferable, wherever possible, to include express terms 
in a contract to show that basic contractual requirements have 
4 The impact of the third parties’ legislation should be considered 
where applicable. 
5 Where multipartite – joint and several liability issues should be 
considered. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 1

--- Page 762/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
been met and to provide greater certainty as to what the terms 
of the contract are. It is desirable for a party to be able to rely on express terms rather than terms which may be implied or 
incorporated. 
16.3.1 Parties 
Purpose To set out each party’s details. Content The agreement should commence with a statement of who the contracting parties are. The contract should state: 
•	Each party’s full name and address , so it is clear 
between whom the agreement is made and that the party named in the contract is the same as the party with whom the contract has been negotiated. Each party should then check that the other party is a separate legal entity and that it has the authority and capacity to enter into the contract. The parties may also be concerned about their counterparty’
s ﬁnancial 
position (e.g. if there is an actual or threatened liqui-dation or administration or if a guarantee or a letter of indemnity has been issued, which can potentially affect the course of parties’ 
dealing). 
•	The registered (or principal) ofﬁce and place of incor­poration , if either party is a company 
. 
•	Which of the parties is the buyer and which is the seller (and whether there is more than one of either). In more detailed agreements there may be a statement in the introduction describing the type of business that each of the parties is engaged in, for example: oil trader; reﬁner; electricity generating company
. 
The agreement can also contain introductory words , commonly 
called recitals , which brieﬂy explain why the parties are enter-
ing into the contract. Such recitals do not necessarily form the terms and conditions of the contract but may be helpful in deter-mining the parties’ intentions at the time of entering into the con-tract should the contracting parties ever be in dispute. It should be noted that these are not usually employed in short form telex contracts such as spot oil trading contracts where an exchange of telexes will sufﬁce. 
16.3/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 763/964 ---
16 Contracts
Finally, at the end of the agreement there must be a provi­
sion for the parties to sign the document in order to make it a 
binding contract. The wording which appears beside each party’s signature is commonly called an attestation and will vary depend-
ing on whether it is a company or individual who is signing the contract. The company’
s representative(s) should present an 
authorisation establishing that signing of the contract in ques-tion on behalf of the company is within his/her competence and as such making the contract binding on the company
. In some 
cases there may be special requirements such as notarisation or the afﬁxing of a seal. Example At the beginning of the contract: 
“This Agreement is made the [ ] day of [ ] 19[ ] BETWEEN: (1) [Name] of [Address] (‘Seller’) and 
(2) [Name] of [Address] (‘Purchaser’)”. 
“Whereas: 
(A) The Buyer wishes to buy and the Seller wishes to sell 
[crude oil] on the following terms and conditions”. 
At the end of the contract: 
“Signed by [print individual’s name] [SIGNATURE] for and on behalf of [print company’s name].” 
16.3.2 Date 
Purpose To specify the date of the agreement and when the contract takes effect. Content Sets out the date on which the contract is made , so there is no 
doubt when the contract was signed. However
, there may be an 
“effective date” deﬁned elsewhere in the text of the agreement which may be different from the date of signing. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 3

--- Page 764/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Examples 
This Agreement is made the [ ] day of [ ] 19[ ]; 
This Agreement has been entered into on the date ﬁrst stated at the beginning of this Agreement; or This Agreement takes effect as at the Effective Date. 16.3.3 Deﬁnitions 
Purpose It is common for terms to be deﬁned in the ﬁrst clause of a con-
tract. This is useful for a number of reasons. Deﬁnitions will help to keep the contract concise and to avoid repetition of lengthy expressions that may be used several times. Deﬁnitions will also avoid a general meaning being applied where a more speciﬁc one is required. For example, the term “oil” may mean “Dubai crude oil” and not any other kind of crude oil or reﬁned product. 
Deﬁning terms is particularly important where terms are 
intended to have some meaning other than their usual common meaning. For example, “year” might not mean a calendar year but some other twelve month period. The precise meaning of ship-ping terms is also of great importance when describing, in par-ticular, transportation obligations of each of the parties. Content The clause may contain, preferably in alphabetical order, a list of terms in quotations with meanings or a cross reference to where those terms are deﬁned subsequently in the contract. Examples Typical deﬁnitions in a spot or term contract for physical oil would include the following terms: 
•	The agreement : specify whether the agreement 
includes any general conditions of sale and refer to these clearly by name. For example, “Dubai Crude Oil General T
erms and Conditions”, and the date of the 
relevant edition or any other special conditions agreed between the parties. It is not sufﬁcient if a party merely prints its special conditions on the reverse of the contract without expressly stating that they apply. 
16.3/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 765/964 ---
16 Contracts
•	Periods of time : state whether a day is intended to 
mean 24 hours or a year is on a calendar year basis and when the time of a day/year is deemed to begin and end. 
•	The product : specify the commodity being bought. 
T
erms such as “gas oil”, “commercial butane” or “oil” 
are too vague unless further deﬁned. “Oil” may mean feedstock and/or petroleum products, and “feedstock” and “petroleum products” will also require deﬁnitions. The deﬁnition may also refer to a quality speciﬁcation elsewhere in the agreement which will provide for a more detailed description and speciﬁcation. 
•	Quantities and measurement : deﬁne terms such as 
“cargo”, “ton” and “barrel”. Where terms of measure-ment are used it should be made clear if these are metric or imperial. There may be a cross reference to a more detailed provision contained in a separate quantity clause. 
•	Shipping terms : the following expressions are com-
monly deﬁned in oil contracts: loading and discharge ports and terminals; commencement and completion of loading times; laydays; the vessel; working days; bill of lading; notice of readiness (NOR); waybill; delivery order; lighterage, demurrage. 
Commentary It is more likely that a term contract for the purchase of large quantities of oil at speciﬁed times – which is subject to many con-ditions as to quality, time of delivery and the obligations of the parties – will require and beneﬁt from a detailed deﬁnition clause. By contrast a telex conﬁrming a spot trading agreement may contain no deﬁned terms at all, or simply refer to a published code or a previously negotiated master agreement which itself contains deﬁned terms that the parties require to be incorporated into their agreement. For example, where the parties state that the contract shall be governed by an agreed set of terms and conditions, e.g. “Shell’
s General Terms and Conditions, 1990”. 
16.3.4 Quality 
Purpose The purpose of a quality provision is to state the speciﬁcation required for a particular type of crude oil, reﬁned product or feed-
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 5

--- Page 766/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
stock and the procedures for and limitation on making a claim in 
respect of material that is off speciﬁcation. It may contain a sliding scale cash adjustment for permitted variations within a band. 
Content Some of this may already have been dealt with in the deﬁnition of the product. The following points should be addressed: 
•	Description: this obviously depends on the type of oil. 
It would be appropriate to include a speciﬁcation of the sulphur content, speciﬁc gravity
, pour point and cloud 
ﬁlter plugging point (CFPP) for gas oil, but the origin, blend and API gravity for crude oil. 
•	Warranties: a buyer may require a warranty as to 
quality (and this should be expressed to be without prejudice to any statutory rights available to it), even if it is implied. 
A seller will want to limit this as far as 
possible. For example, only as far as the quality gen-erally being supplied, at the time of loading in an FOB contract. Some warranty clauses include notice proce-dures and time limits for making a claim if there is a defect in quality
. 
•	Claims: the inclusion of a procedure to notify the seller 
of defects can provide certainty for both parties. The following points may be addressed: 
•	the speciﬁc matters for which the buyer may make a claim. For example, a shortage in quantity or a defect in quality
. It may also contain potential limi-
tation on type of claim (i.e. no consequential loss for offspec crude oil causing damage to buyer
’s facilities 
or loss of business, etc), 
•	how the notice is to be given to the seller: in writing; with how much supporting information; within a certain time period (e.g. within so many days fol-lowing the bill of lading date or on discovery of the defect); and whether the notice is to be followed up by a more formal claim within a certain time, 
•	a limitation period during which the buyer may bring proceedings or issue a formal claim once the initial notice has been given, 
•	the effect on the buyer of failure to comply with the procedure. It is in the seller
’s interests to state that 
16.3/page 6	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 767/964 ---
16 Contracts
if no formal claim is received within a certain time the claim is deemed to have been waived. 
•	Certiﬁcates: the requirement to issue certiﬁcates of 
quality may be in both parties’ 
interests in order to 
establish whether the oil was of the right quality at the time of delivery. The buyer often requires such documents against which payment may then be made (see Section 16.3.13 on inspection and sampling ). 
•	Testing: both parties may wish to agree arrangements 
to test for quality
. Provisions concerning rights of sam-
pling and inspection are dealt with in Section 16.3.13. 
Examples 
“all statutory conditions or warranties with respect to the description, merchantability or quality of the oil or its ﬁtness for any purpose are hereby excluded”.
6 
“Notice of any claim by Buyer, either as to shortage in quan-tity or to defects in quality, shall be submitted to Seller, in writing, with full supporting documentation, within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the bill of lading date, or such shorter period as the Seller
’s supplier may require (as 
notiﬁed to Buyer in advance). Buyer’s failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall be deemed a waiver by Buyer of any such quantity and/or quality claim. With respect to any such quantity and/or quality claim for which notice is given in accordance with this section, Buyer shall commence proceedings pursuant to Section NN within two (2) years from the bill of lading date or any such quantity and/or quality claim shall be forever barred. With respect to the oil sold and purchased hereunder, there are no representations, guaran-tees or warranties, express or implied, of merchantability, ﬁtness, suitability of the oil for any particular purpose, or otherwise, which extend beyond the description set forth in the special provisions. Seller and Seller
’s supplier shall not 
be liable under this agreement for any special, indirect, or consequential damages.”
7 
“Any notice of claim as to a defect in quality with respect to any cargo of oil shall be made in writing to Seller immedi-ately after such apparent defect is discovered. Any such notice of claim shall be followed promptly by a formal written claim with all necessary details to promptly process such claim. IF NO FORMAL 
WRITTEN CLAIM IS RECEIVED WITHIN 
6 Shell FOB/CIF Contract.
7 Amoco FOB Contract.
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 7

--- Page 768/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
SIXTY DA YS AFTER DELIVERY OF THE OIL TO THE 
BUYER, THE CLAIM SHALL BE DEEMED TO HAVE BEEN WAIVED.... THERE ARE NO GUARANTEES, 
WARRANTIES OR REPRESENTATIONS, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OF MERCHANT-ABILITY, FITNESS OR SUIT
-
ABILITY OF THE OIL FOR ANY PARTICULAR PUR-POSE OR OTHERWISE WHICH EXTEND BEYOND THE DESCRIPTION OF THE OIL 
SET FORTH IN THIS 
AGREEMENT.”8 
“There are no guarantees or warranties, express or implied, of merchantability, ﬁtness or suitability of the oil for any particular purpose or otherwise which extend beyond the description of the Oil appearing in the Special Terms and Conditions.”
9 
“The quality of each grade of Oil shall be the usual produc-tion quality of that grade being sold by Seller at the time and place of delivery
, unless speciﬁcations are prescribed else-
where in this Agreement, in which case such speciﬁcations shall represent the only quality characteristics which the Oil is required to meet. THERE 
ARE NO GUARANTEES 
OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OF MER-CHANTABILITY, FITNESS AND SUITABILITY OF THE OIL 
FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR OTHERWISE, 
WHICH EXTEND BEYOND THE DESCRIPTION ON THE FACE HEREOF.”
10 
16.3.5 Quantity 
Purpose To specify the amount of oil to be sold and purchased under the contract. Content The following points may be speciﬁed depending on the type of contract: 
•	the number and type of relevant units , these could be 
measured either by volume (e.g. metric tonnes) or by weight (e.g. US gallons or barrels), 
8Chevron FOB Contract.
9Elf FOB Contract.
10Exxon FOB Contract.
16.3/page 8	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 769/964 ---
16 Contracts
•	delivery tolerances and at whose option ; for example 
“30,000 metric tons ? 10 percent in Seller
’s option”, 
•	in a CIF contract, the parties may allow for evapora­tion where relevant and permit delivery within a 
stated percentage of the quantities speciﬁed in the bill of lading. 
Examples 
“[Quantity] metric tons plus/minus 5 per cent Seller’s option.”
11 
“Quality as determined by [original supplier] at loading port [load port]. Load port quality to be ﬁnal and binding on both parties. Quantity for bill of lading shall be determined by an independent inspector [inspector name] or other mutually agreed inspector. The deemed b/l quantity shall be the average of the mother vessel’s ship’s ﬁgures and the receiving vessel’s ship’s ﬁgures. The resulting quantity, conﬁrmed by the inspectors, will be considered as ﬁnal b/l quantity, to be ﬁnal and binding for both parties. Inspection costs to be shared 50/50 between seller/buyer.”
12 
Commentary In a term contract specify the lot size, for example: 10 lots of a speciﬁed number of metric tonnes each quarter
. 
Delivery tolerances should be made with respect to the buyer 
or seller
’s operational tolerance. 
In the case of CIF contracts there has been much debate 
about whether 0.5 per cent loss by evaporation is or is not a “custom of the trade”. 
Although courts on both sides of the 
Atlantic have recognised evaporation loss as an accepted occur-rence, it is only in the USA that 0.5 per cent has been established as the level agreed by trade custom. 16.3.6 Price 
Purpose To specify the unit price by currency and by reference to units of the commodity
. This may be either a “ﬁxed and ﬂat” price or a 
reference to a prevailing market price, for example a futures price 
11 Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB Contract (2).
12Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB Contract (2).
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 9

--- Page 770/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
or a published price assessment (e.g. Platt’s or an e-index for 
screen tradings). 
Content The following points should be included: 
•	the currency (usually US dollars or euros where the 
trading parties are from the Member States of the European Union participating in the common cur-rency) per unit of measurement and, except where the price is ﬁxed and ﬂat, the basis for establishing the price by reference to a particular published marker and whether such a marker is chosen by reference to the same geographical region as the buyer or seller; 
•	if the price is to be established by reference to a pub-lished price (e.g. Platt’
 s) then specify the date or dates 
on which that price is taken (often at or around the bill 
of lading date in the case of an FOB contract); 
•	what happens if the published price the parties have referred to becomes unavailable or unascertainable . In 
these circumstances, the parties may try and agree an alternative suitable index or take the nearest previ-ously available index (the parties may need to take into account how often the index is quoted when decid-ing its suitability). Alternatively, it could be weighted against an average of a series of published prices. The parties will also need to agree on a provisional pricing mechanism, where there is a manifest error in the pub-lished price, whilst sorting out dispute (if any); 
•	any differential required to take account of quality of 
the oil and how that is to be determined, for example by formula or the parties’ 
agreement or, failing this, 
expert determination; 
•	provisions to allow for other events which may affect 
the enforceability of a price provision . For example, 
there may be government regulations affecting the enforceability of a price (e.g. price freezing) which mean that a price determined under the contract will not be effective because to do so would violate a direc-tion or request of a government. In such circumstances it may be appropriate to agree on an alternative course of action and, if the parties are unable to agree, provi-sion will need to be made to permit suspension of per-formance with respect to the quantity of oil affected. 
16.3/page 10	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 771/964 ---
16 Contracts
Examples 
“Unless otherwise speciﬁed in the special terms and condi-tions, the price of a shipment shall be that in force at the date of the bill of lading of such shipment.”
13 
“US dollars [price] fob [tankco] Amsterdam on EEC basis excluding any duties.”
14 
“Price: the ﬁve day arithmetic average of the mean of Platt’s 
high and low quotations for Arabian Gulf fob high sulphur fuel oil 180 cst cargoes as published in Platt’s European Mar­
ketscan plus [price differential] US dollars per metric ton. The 
ﬁve quotations used shall be the bill of lading date, two days prior and two days after the bill of lading date of the [seller’s ship name] or substitute at the loading port [load port]. In the event that there is no Platt’s publication on the bill of lading 
date then only four effective quotations shall be used, i.e. two before and two after the bill of lading date.”
15 
Commentary In a long-term contract, there may be a ﬂoor and/or ceiling price and the seller may try to negotiate a “hardship clause”, which confers the right to terminate the contract if it becomes uneco-nomic, or the right to renegotiate the price in the event of ma-terial change of market conditions. 
Prices may also be agreed by including a “netback” provision 
whereby the seller receives the price realised by the buyer after the buyer
’s costs for a sale have been deducted; or by a counter 
trade or barter whereby the product is processed and part of the processed product is returned to the seller to reduce the ini-tial purchase price. These types of pricing arrangements are described in Chapter 3. 16.3.7 Payment 
Purpose To provide methods and procedures for payment
16 of the price of 
the commodity delivered: 
13Elf FOB Contract. 
14Appendix 16.1 Sample FOB Contract (1). 
15Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB Contract (2). 
16For discussion concerning Letters of Credit and Parent Company 
Guarantees see Section 16.5.2 and Chapter 13. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 11

--- Page 772/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Content 
The following points should be included: 
•	the currency in which payment is to be made , if this has 
not already been stated in the price; 
•	the chosen method of payment , this is typically by 
telegraphic transfer or a letter of credit. In either case the seller may require payment to be supported by a bank/parent company guarantee or a performance bond; 
•	if payment is made by telegraphic transfer, the time , 
date and place of payment . For example, a contract 
may require that payment is to be made to the named seller
’s account at a bank on the due date of pay-
ment by a certain time (before the banks close) in the country of payment. The seller will usually also require that the payment is to be made in funds having good value on the day in question (i.e. cleared funds); 
•	the due date of payment . Examples of a due date are: 
a date as notiﬁed by the seller or a date within so many days either following discharge of the cargo at the discharge port or following the buyer
’s nomination. 
Where the due date of payment is not a business day then such payment should be required to be made on the next (or preceding) day which is a business day. “Business day” may typically be deﬁned as a day on which the banks are normally open for business in the country in which payment is to be received. Strictly speaking, if it is not speciﬁed in the contract that if the due date is not a business day, payment must be made on the business day preceding the due date in order to meet the due date payment objectives, but most parties prefer to be speciﬁc; 
•	procedures for the events of non-payment , this would 
establish the amount of interest accruing on the over-due payments. They may also give to the seller the rights to terminate the contract or to suspend per-formance of its delivery obligations. 
Examples 
“Payment for each cargo shall be made by Buyers to Sellers against presentation of the following documents: 
16.3/page 12	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 773/964 ---
16 Contracts
(i)	full set of clean original Bill of Lading 
(ii) invoice 	 complying with the requirements of this 
Paragraph 
within 30 days of the Bill of Lading date, free of all charges and without asserting at the time for payment any set-off, counterclaim or right to withhold whatsoever, in United States Dollars in New 
York to Seller’s account number [ ] with 
[the Bank] (or to such other bank account as may be advised by Sellers to Buyers from time to time) quoting Seller’s invoice number and Buyers’ name; provided however that if any or all of the required documents are not available at the time payment is due hereunder Buyers shall pay against Seller’s Letter of Indemnity for the missing documents.”
17 
“Upon presentation of Seller’s invoice and any other docu-ments set aside in the Special Provisions, Buyer shall make payment for the Oil delivered hereunder
, within the time 
designated in the Special Provisions, by telegraphic transfer in US Dollars to Seller’s Bank identiﬁed in the invoice of immediately available (‘same day’) funds for Seller’s use on due date prior to closing time of Seller’s bank. In the absence of any time designated in the Special Provisions, payment shall be made to the Seller in accordance with the provisions of this Section within thirty (30) days after Bill of Lading date. If the payment due date falls on a Saturday or banking holiday other than Monday, payment will be effected on the preceding common bank business day. If the payment due date falls on a Sunday or Monday banking holiday, then the payment will be effected on the next common bank business day.”
18 
“Payment for the Oil shall be made against Seller’s invoice in US Dollars by telegraphic transfer of immediately available funds to Seller at [ ] account of [ ] Account No. [ ], or at such other address or depository as Seller may designate in writing. If the payment due date falls on a Sunday, or on a Monday which is a [New York] bank holiday, payment shall be made in immediately available funds to Seller on the next [New York] banking day after such payment due date. If the payment due date falls on a Saturday, or on a [New York] bank holiday other than a Monday, payment shall be made in immediately available funds to Seller on the last [New York] banking day prior to such payment due date.”
19 
17Shell FOB/CIF Contract. 
18Amoco FOB Contract. 
19Chevron FOB Contract. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 13

--- Page 774/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
16.3.8 Title and risk 
Purpose To agree the point at which or time when title and risk (but not necessarily be simultaneous) passes from the seller to the buyer under the contract. Content A statement of the exact point at which title and risk passes from one party to the other
. 
Examples 
“as the oil passes the ﬂange connection between the delivery hose and the vessel’s permanent cargo intake manifold at the port of loading”
20 
“The risk and property of the shipment delivered hereunder shall pass to the buyer as the crude petroleum passes the per-manent hose connection at the port of loading.”
21 
Commentary Risk will normally pass at the same time as title and delivery, but it can pass at a different time. In FOB contracts this typi-cally passes at the loading port and the exact point, normally the ﬂange connection, at which it passes should be described. 
Ex-ship contracts are different because the title and risk nor-
mally passes at the port of shipment. The seller bears the risks of the goods until the goods pass the ship’
s rail at the port of ship-
ment (if the lighterage is required the parties should decide who is liable for such costs). Once the goods have effectively passed the ship’
s rail the buyer then bears all the risks of the goods. In 
either case the insurance obligations should reﬂect which party bears the risk for the oil. 
In either an FOB or a CIF contract, a buyer may require that 
the seller gives a warranty that it has title to the oil and that oil sold and delivered is free and clear of all charges, liens and encumbrances. 
20Amoco FOB General Provisions for Purchase and Sale of Oil in 
Bulk. 
21BP Oil International Limited, Conditions of Sale for Crude Petro-
leum FOB, Single Shipment (1986). 
16.3/page 14 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 775/964 ---
16 Contracts
Provisions as to title and risk may however be incorporated 
or implied. Generally under English law property in identiﬁed goods is transferred to the buyer when it is intended to pass. Prior to 1995 property in unascertained goods could not pass under Section 16 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979. But the Sale of Goods (Amendment) Act 1995 amended the Sale of Goods Act 1979 by inserting Section 20A, which now allows for the passing of own-ership where a speciﬁed quantity of unascertained goods forms part of an identiﬁed bulk for contracts entered into, on or after 19 September 1995. 
Each case will vary depending on the facts, but the inten-
tion as to when property passes may be stated or implied from the terms of the contract or under Rules in s.17 of the Sale of Goods 
Act 1979 (if that Act applies). In addition, Incoterms 
provide terms in respect of risk (but not title) and the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1992 gives rights to the holder of a bill of lading ( see Section 16.4.2 ). 
16.3.9 Settlement or bookout 
Purpose To allow for a contract, which could form part of a continuous circle of transactions, to be settled by the payment of differences. If a party appears more than once in a chain of transactions, as often occurs, for example, in the 15-day Brent market, the con-tract may allow for the transactions to be “formed into a circle” and by agreement cancelled with the payment of the difference between the buying and selling prices. For example, a chain of transactions which involves Company C twice, 
A�B�C�D�E�F�C�G�H 
can be partly rearranged into a circle as follows: 
A�B�C�G�H 
D F 
E 
This is known as a “bookout” and is described in more detail in Chapters 7 and 13. Content The following points should be included: 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 15

--- Page 776/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
•	a deﬁnition of the settlement agreement , which is 
normally an agreement between each of the parties involved in the circle pursuant to which no physical delivery of oil is made; 
•	an obligation to enter into a settlement agreement pro-
posed by one of the parties to any of the transactions in the circle on condition that each party involved in the circle has given or gives a similar undertaking; 
•	the type of oil to which the agreement will apply , for 
example, Brent System crude oil; 
•	a deemed delivery quantity , for example, 500,000 
barrels; 
•	a deemed completion day of loading and deemed bill of lading , for example, a speciﬁed day in a month or in a 
loading range; 
•	terms of the settlement agreement pursuant to which 
each party agrees to cancel its particular contracts in consideration of each party in the circle making payment to or receiving payment from (as the case may be) its supplier and its customer of such sums as shall be agreed between each seller in the circle and its cus-tomer. The parties may also consider provision for an adjustment mechanism dealing with the other party’
s 
trades or trades of unequal amounts of crude oil. 
Example Shell UK Limited’s General Conditions for the Sale of Brent Blend Crude Oil on 15 Day T
erms 1990 (Clause 20, Bookout) state 
that: 
“(a) If after the date on which this Agreement is entered 
into it is found that the transaction which is the subject of this Agreement forms part of a series of transactions which can be shown by any party to any of such transactions to form a continuous circle of such transactions (‘the circle’) the parties hereto hereby express willingness to consider entering into any bookout agreement (as deﬁned in Clause 20(b) below) that may reasonably be proposed by any party to any of the transactions in the circle provided always that each party involved in the circle has given or gives a similar undertaking, it being always understood that each party hereto retains all rights to decline to enter any such bookout agreement in its 
16.3/page 16	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 777/964 ---
16 Contracts
sole and unfettered discretion and without any obli-gation to give any reasons therefor. 
(b)	 For the purpose of Clause 20(a) above, a bookout 
agreement shall mean an agreement between all parties to the circle in question pursuant to which each party in the circle agrees to forgo the receiving or making of physical delivery of Oil and to discharge its relevant contracts of purchase and sale in consid-eration of each other party in the circle undertaking to make payment to or receive payment from, as the case may be, its supplier and its customer of such sums as shall be agreed between each supplier in the circle and its customer
. In determining the sums so 
payable Buyer and Seller agree that if the delivery in question is Brent System crude oil the following shall apply in any such bookout agreement: 
(i)	 there shall be a deemed delivery quantity of the 
Nominal V
olume; 
(ii)	 there shall be a deemed bill of lading date of either 
the 15th day of the Speciﬁed Month or
, if the 
Seller’s declaration of the Laydays has been made pursuant to the Agreement, the middle Day of the Laydays; and 
(iii) discounting, if agreed, shall be based on the London 
Interbank Offer Rate for one month Eurodollars current on the date on which such bookout agree-ment is formally proposed by one party in the circle to all the other parties in the circle. 
(c)	 The provisions relating to the method of payment in 
the bookout agreement shall, unless otherwise specif-ically agreed between the parties to the agreement, be as set out in the payment provisions hereof if the sum payable is to be paid by Buyer to Seller
. If, 
however, such sum is to be paid by Seller to Buyer payment shall, unless otherwise agreed, be in accor-dance with such payment provisions as would usually be found in any sales by Buyer to Seller under sales contracts between them.” 
Should the parties agree to a bookout pursuant to Clause 20 above, a separate bookout contract would be drafted. The follow-ing is a sample of a standard Brent 15-day bookout contract involving three participants, “Company 
A”, “Company B” and 
“Company C” booking out and netting off sales for February 2002 Brent 15-day. Although bookout circles for 15-day Brent more 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 17

--- Page 778/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
commonly involve four or ﬁve participants, in theory the number 
of participants in a bookout circle is only limited by the length of a sale chain and the number of matching buys and sells. Bookout circles involving as many as 12 participants where the same party may appear more than once have been known in the Brent 15-day market. Note that the contract below, which is sent to all the bookout participants, does not refer to the agreed price for each deal, as this information is conﬁdential between each buyer and seller. The contract does however refer to a “base price”, nor
-
mally agreed at the time of the bookout, which is used as an adjustment mechanism for determining the invoice quantity to be settled on each party
. Interest at a mutually agreed rate for 
the period between the bookout settlement date and the normally anticipated settlement date (e.g. 30 days after the Bill of Lading date) is usually discounted from the invoices. The bookout is not effective until such time as each participant agrees in writing to the terms of the bookout contract. FEBRUARY 2002 BRENT CRUDE OIL BOOKOUT AGREEMENT The following is a very recent example; terms for a cargo of Brent crude oil which is to be delivered during February
, 2002 includ-
ing the following provisions: 
Company A proposes the following bookout agreement format in order to facilitate the handling of these agree-ments. The language of the bookout agreement would read as follows: 
QUOTE This agreement is dated as of 15/02/2002 by and among Company A, Company B, Company C. 
Whereas (A) Company A and Company B are parties to a 
contract dated 03/01/02 in which Company 
A has agreed to sell, 
and Company B has agreed to purchase a cargo of Brent crude oil. Such contract being brieﬂy described as follows: Volume Crude T
 ype Delivery Contract 
500,000 bbls Brent February 03/01/02 
and whereas (B) Company B and Company C are parties to a con-tract dated 24/12/01 in which Company B has agreed to sell, and Company C has agreed to purchase a cargo of Brent crude oil. Such contract being brieﬂy described as follows: 
16.3/page 18 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 779/964 ---
16 Contracts
Volume Crude Type Delivery Contract 
500,000 bbls Brent February 24/12/01 
and whereas (C) Company C and Company A are parties to a con-tract dated 06/01/02 in which Company C has agreed to sell, and Company 
A has agreed to purchase a cargo of Brent crude oil. 
Such contract being brieﬂy described as follows: Volume Crude T
 ype Delivery Contract 
500,000 bbls Brent February 06/01/02 
and whereas (D) Company A and Company B and Company C have concluded and agreed that it would be in their respective best interests to terminate each of the contracts identiﬁed above. 
Now therefore it is hereby agreed as follows: 1.	In consideration of the execution of this agreement to 
terminate each of the contracts identiﬁed above and entering into this agreement to pay the cancellation fees as set forth below and subject as hereinafter provided each party hereby expressly releases each other party and their successors, assigns and legal representatives from all liability
, claims and demands 
arising out of the contracts identiﬁed above and each of the above identiﬁed contracts is hereby terminated with effect from the effective date hereof as deﬁned in Clause 8. 
2.	In order to calculate the cancellation fee payable by each party hereto a base price of US Dollars 21.0000 per barrel (“The Base Price”) shall be used and a notional Bill of Lading date of 15/02/02. 
3.	Each party hereto shall pay to its Seller a cancellation fee equal to 500,000 multiplied by the amount, if any
, 
by which such party’s purchase price per barrel exceeds the base price. Each party hereto shall pay to its Buyer a cancellation fee equal to 500,000 multiplied by the amount, if any, by which such party’s sale price per barrel is less than the base price. Each such can-cellation fee shall be paid in US Dollars in immediately available funds on or before 22/02/02 and shall be dis-counted based on a 1.8400 per cent per annum inter-est rate for 23 days. 
4.	All payments hereunder shall be made in full without set-off, deduction or counterclaim. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 19

--- Page 780/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
5.	This cancellation agreement shall be subject to and 
construed in accordance with the Laws of England and subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts. 
6.	The signatories hereto hereby warrant and represent that they are authorised and empowered by their company to consent to this agreement. 
7.	Each party hereto expressly warrants and represents that the details of those contracts to which it is party as referred to in recitals (A), (B), (C) and (D) above are correct and accurate in all respects and hereby acknowledges that the other parties hereto which are not a party to such contracts are acting on reliance of the above warranty and representation. 
8.	This Agreement, issued by Company B, shall not come into effect until Company B has given telex notice to all other parties to this agreement, stating that Company B has received the telexed agreement of all such parties to the terms of this agreement. The date on which Company B gives the last such notice shall be the “Effective Date”. 
Please note that unless telex agreement to the terms of the pro-posed bookout agreement are received by Company B from all parties by 20/02/02, the above proposal shall lapse. The above proposal is made without prejudice to Company B’
s rights under 
its contracts referred to above, which shall remain in full force and effect unless and until the bookout agreement referred to above becomes effective. Commentary Problems can occur if there is bankruptcy in the circle and the potential consequences should be considered (e.g. if a liquidator has the power to disclaim bookout arrangements). 16.3.10 Delivery 
Purpose To ascertain when delivery of the goods to the buyer will take place. 
16.3/page 20	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 781/964 ---
16 Contracts
Content The terms of the contract will depend on the method of delivery. If the oil is being delivered FOB, the following points should be included: 
•	the obligation of the seller to deliver ; 
•	the quantity of oil to be delivered , for example, whether 
it is in full or part cargo lots; 
•	the place where the oil should be delivered. This will 
typically be at the load port where vessels will nor-mally be provided by the buyer. The loading port is nor-mally speciﬁed if it has not already been deﬁned; 
•	the period or periods when delivery is to be made . A 
mechanism for notifying when the seller is ready to deliver or when the buyer is ready to present its ship tank for loading will also need to be included. Such pro-visions are usually dealt with under the heading “nom-inations” or “loading conditions” and will not be speciﬁcally dealt with under the delivery obligation; 
•	any particular criteria, consents or approvals , for 
example environmental standards, that the seller requires the off take vessel to meet; 
•	any terminal and/or operating procedures that are 
to be complied with. These may be published and referred to in the contract or they may be expressly incorporated. 
If the oil is being delivered ex-ship the following points should be included: 
•	the seller’s obligation to ship the oil in a vessel assigned 
by the seller to the discharge port; 
•	the buyer’s obligation to arrange for availability at the 
discharge terminal of a berth; 
•	the parties should provide for apportionment of liabil-ities related to port problems, which may give rise to demurrage (i.e. they will need to agree “allowed 
laytime”); 
•	the quantity(ies) to be shipped and the number of 
shipments; 
•	any speciﬁed loading port(s) ; 
•	an obligation on the buyer to inform the seller of 
matters relating to the discharge port such as restric-tions, maximum draft and length, terminal proce-dures, and any customary requirements. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 21

--- Page 782/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Examples 
Delivery FOB 
“Delivery of the Oil shall be made to Buyer in full cargo lots or in substantial part cargo lots as mutually agreed, at the load port as the Oil passes the ﬂanges connect-ing Seller’s or Seller’s supplier’s delivery hoses to the loading connections of vessels provided by Buyer at the normal loading terminals for the Oil.”
22 
“the Seller shall deliver or cause to be delivered oil in bulk to the Buyer free on board tank vessels provided by the Buyer at the loading port.”
23 
Delivery ex-ship 
“(a) Seller shall ship the oil to Buyer in bulk in vessel(s) 
provided or arranged by seller
, CIF or C&F (as 
appearing in the special terms) the discharge port, for discharge at the discharge terminal arranged by buyer to be available therefore. Buyer and Seller shall have agreed in the special terms as to the total quan-tity of oil to be shipped, the discharge port(s), and the period(s) within which Seller will arrange for the oil to be available at the discharge port(s), and the number of shipments to be made. 
(b)	 Each shipment shall be made by Seller from such 
loading port(s) as it may determine in its discretion, unless particular loading port(s) are designated load-ing port(s), in which event the shipment may be made therefrom. 
(c)	 Buyer shall provide at the discharge terminal a berth, 
mooring, or other area suitable for discharge of the oil from any of the seller
’s vessels otherwise conforming 
to the terms hereof. However, Buyer does not by this contract warrant the safety of any such place. Buyer shall furnish with reasonable dispatch, upon Seller’s reasonable request therefor, all information readily available to it concerning restrictions applicable at the discharge port and the discharge terminal with respect to maximum draft, length, and the like, ter-
22Chevron FOB Contract. 
23Amoco FOB Contract. 
16.3/page 22	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 783/964 ---
16 Contracts
minal procedures relevant to vessel operations, and special or non-customary requirements of govern-mental authorities at the discharge port with respect to vessel operations therei n... 
[24]” 
Commentary Provisions for the delivery of oil will depend very much on the general nature of the contract and whether it is FOB or ex-ship or provides for delivery at mid-sea. 
The obligation to “deliver” may be extended or be deﬁned as 
including the obligation to “procure to be delivered” since the seller with whom the contract has been made may not always be the same person who makes the physical delivery of the oil. 
In an ex-ship contract, instead of an obligation to deliver at 
the load port, the seller will be under an obligation to ship the oil to the discharge port. T
ypically the seller will provide (or 
arrange for) the vessel and transfer the oil and the buyer will accept the discharge at the berth which the buyer has provided. If transfer is ship-to-ship then the parties normally expressly incorporate appropriate ship-to-ship transfer rules ( see Appendix 
16.2). 
16.3.11 Nominations 
Purpose To provide a detailed procedure for the notiﬁcation of delivery or discharge of goods. Content Nomination terms are typically found under headings such as “V
essel Nomination”, “Nominating Procedure” and “Presentation 
Date Range” and may provide for the following: 
•	a notiﬁcation procedure whereby the buyer advises the 
seller at a certain time each month under a term 
24Mobil CIF Contract. The clause continues with accepted date 
range provisions which are the same as for the FOB Contract (see above) except the Seller and Buyer have been transposed so that, for example, the Seller notiﬁes the Buyer of the proposed date range and the Buyer has to respond promptly to each of the Seller’s Notices etc. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 23

--- Page 784/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
contract (or in a spot contract by a certain time before 
the speciﬁed date range) when the buyer will be able to lift the cargo; 
•	information that is to be contained in the buyer’s notice including, for example, the vessel’
s name, the ﬂag, the 
crew nationality; size of vessel (capacity, length, beam, draught); the load port; the estimated time of arrival of load port within a certain date range (typically ﬁve days) and the number of loaders within that date range. If appropriate, it may also include the quantity and quality of the cargo and any other particular in-formation which the seller may require relating to matters such as safety; 
•	the time in which the seller may respond to the buyer 
conﬁrming or rejecting the nomination. Where the seller fails to respond then the seller may be deemed to have accepted the notiﬁcation. Conversely
, where 
the seller rejects the nomination then the parties may wish to include a provision for mutual agreement to a new time for notiﬁcation; 
•	a buyer’s rights to substitute the vessel and to amend the 
nomination . In both cases the seller may be con-
cerned that such substitution and amendment rights are only exercised with prior notice to the seller; 
•	a buyer’s obligation to ensure that the vessel conforms to all 
the loading port’s regulations ; 
•	the seller’s obligation to provide a safe berth for the vessel at the seller 
’s cost; 
•	the seller’s ability to inspect the vessel to ensure it 
meets with safety and environmental requirements; 
•	a provision dealing with cover for pollution incidents . 
For instance, in an FOB contract the seller will be con-cerned that the buyer warrants that the nominated vessel is owned or demise chartered by a member of the International T
anker Owners Pollution Federation 
Ltd (ITOPF) and that adequate insurance has been taken out and the vessel carries on board a certiﬁcate of insurance as described in the 1992 Civil Liability Convention for Oil Pollution Damage; 
•	timing: it should be made clear if days are intended to 
be “working days” as sometimes port will not load after dark and what days are intended to be “working days” as port may not load on Fridays, Saturdays and/or Sundays. Both parties may wish to exclude public holi-days in a speciﬁc country and for certainty it is advis-
16.3/page 24	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 785/964 ---
16 Contracts
able to refer to those excluded days expressly. Gener-ally for the purposes of giving notices for notiﬁcation and responding to such notices the actual time for the commencement of a date range may be helpful and to specify whether GMT or some other time of another country will apply
. The parties should note that timing 
in the nomination procedure is very important. It was held that a buyer was entitled to cancel its contract where the seller substantially delayed its acceptance of the buyer’s nomination of the vessel.
25 
Example 
“Unless otherwise agreed, Buyers shall at least fourteen (14) days before the ﬁrst day of the agreed loading date range notify Sellers by telex of the name and summer deadweight tonnage of the vessel to be used and the expected date of that vessel’s arrival at the loading port, and shall provide Sellers with any other vessel details necessary for the purpose of implementing the agreement. Sellers shall give notice accept-ing or rejecting any vessel nomination within two (2) London working days after receipt of such nomination, but shall not reject any such nomination unreasonably
. In case of rejection, 
Buyers shall, as soon as possible, nominate to Sellers an alter-native vessel for Sellers’ prompt acceptance or rejection, and, in the case of the latter
, the parties shall negotiate a mutu-
ally acceptable nominatio n... ”26 
Commentary The above discussion has highlighted terms in an FOB contract. In an ex-ship contract the obligation to notify is reversed – the seller notiﬁes the buyer of the vessel and date range. 
It should be remembered that “time is of the essence”
27 with 
respect to such commercial contracts and in particular such fun-damental procedures. Failure to make a timely
28 nomination, 
for example, can lead to cancellation of the contract. In such 
25 Phibro Energy AG v. Nissho Iwai Corporation and Bommar Oil 
Inc., [1991] 1 Lloyds Rep 38 AC. 
26Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 7(1), Vessel Nomination. 
27 Bunge Corporation v. Tradax Export SA, [1981] Lloyds Report 7. 
28or timeous (in Scottish law). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 25

--- Page 786/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
circumstances the innocent party may choose to cancel the con -
tract because of changes in market price and is legally entitled to do so. But a party should seek legal advice before walking away from a contract to avoid a wrongful cancellation. 
16.3.12 Transportation 
Purpose To specify conditions for loading or discharge at port. Content The provisions which are commonly found in term contracts under the headings of “loading conditions” or “lay time and demurrage”. The following matters are normally dealt with in such provisions: 
•	an obligation of the buyer to notify the seller (or its rep-
resentative) by giving a Notice of Readiness (NOR) as to when the vessel will be ready to load and when it will arrive at the port of loading; 
•	an obligation for the seller to arrange for loading at the 
berth which the seller is to provide free of charge; 
•	the amount of laytime – how long the vessel may take 
to load or discharge (as the case may be) after the “notice of readiness” (NOR) is given – either to the seller for FOB contracts or to the buyer for ex-ship con-tracts – that the vessel is ready to load or discharge (as the case may be). In the provision allowing for laytime the parties might consider whether to include any unused laytime at the discharge port and specify any particular exclusions, for example, where the vessel has broken down for reasons outside the seller
’s 
control or delays at customs etc. They may also provide for a risks allocation mechanism associated with the port risk events; 
•	the demurrage rate that will apply where a cargo is 
loaded by the seller and exceeds the laytime, and the buyer may require demurrage to be paid by the seller to the buyer at a particular demurrage rate. The seller may require that the buyer will compensate him for the costs incurred due to the late arrival of the ship (i.e. did not conform with NOR or arrived outside con-tract “window”); 
16.3/page 26	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 787/964 ---
16 Contracts
•	if the demurrage rate is not agreed there may be ref-
erence to a published rate, for example, as published by the London T
anker Brokers’ Panel. Such a rate may 
be determined by: 
(a) reference to total deadweight of the vessel multiplied 
by the relevant charter rate; or 
(b) if there are two or more sellers then an appropriate 
fraction of the total demurrage rate may be payable by each according to the amount of oil delivered by each seller; 
•	a provision for reduction where the delay has arisen as 
a result of a certain event, such as ﬁre or some event outside the seller
’s control, which is speciﬁed as being 
an event of force majeure elsewhere in the contract; 
•	a cap on the amount of demurrage payable so that 
it does not exceed that amount of expense actually incurred by the buyer or the amount of demurrage the seller may in turn recover from its own supplier; although in the latter case, the seller should be obliged to recover from its supplier such demurrage claimed by the buyer; 
•	the buyer’s obligation to make a claim within a certain 
time speciﬁed in the contract – for example, within 90 days from the bill of lading date. 
Examples 
“Sellers shall provide or cause to be provided, free of charge, a berth or berths which the vessel can safely reach and leave and at which she can lie and load always safely aﬂoa t...
 ”29 
“Laytime 48 hours plus 6 hours NOR. Demurrage as per per-forming vessel charter party terms and conditions. Laytime shall commence only upon the arrival of the seller
’s nomi-
nated vessel at the intended lightering position [location].”30 
16.3.13 Inspection and sampling 
Purpose To provide a procedure for checking the goods at loading and/or discharge. 
29Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 8(3), Loading Conditions. 
30Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB Contract (2). 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 27

--- Page 788/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Content 
The following points should be included: 
•	the appointment of an independent inspector – this is 
normally a joint appointment by the seller and buyer – and a provision as to whether the cost is to be borne 
equally ; 
•	the individual right of either party to carry out such inspection at its own cost – possibly with the ability to 
carry out such inspection by appointment of a repre-sentative; 
•	the time of inspection – whether both before and after 
delivery; 
•	the method and standard of measurement and sam­pling . For example, in accordance with “good standard 
practice at the port of loading” or “internationally recognised methods and practices”; 
•	a requirement for a certiﬁcate to be prepared and 
signed by the suppliers as to the quantity and quality of the oil loaded upon completion of the loading of the cargo. The sellers may then be required to advise the buyers by telex of the details recorded on the certiﬁcate; 
•	the effectiveness of certiﬁcates of quantity and quality – whether such certiﬁcates will be conclusive and 
binding on both parties; 
•	who is to bear the costs caused by delays in the inspec-
tion and sampling procedure; 
•	the possibility for reference of a dispute to an expert , 
where there is dispute as to the results of sampling. 
Examples 
“As ascertained at load port by independent inspector whose ﬁndings to be ﬁnal. Costs at load port for Seller’s account. At discharge port for Buyer’s account.”
31 
“Where permitted by Seller’s suppliers, Buyers may appoint a representative acceptable to Sellers and Sellers’ suppliers to assist in the supervision of and to inspect the loading of each cargo...I f any difference arises between Buyer’s repre-
sentative and Sellers’ suppliers with regard to the loaded 
31Appendix 16.3 Sample CIF Contract. 
16.3/page 28	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 789/964 ---
16 Contracts
quantity and quality, it shall be settled by an expert appointed under Clause 13.”
32 
“The cost of services of the expert, if appointed, shall be shared equally between Sellers and Buyers.”
33 
Commentary In order to inspect the cargo, the parties should consider at what times this needs to be carried out (before and after loading), by whom and at whose cost. 16.3.14 Force majeure 
Purpose To relieve a party from liability where it has failed to perform its contractual obligations normally as a result of an event which is beyond such party’
s control. 
Content The following points should be included: 
•	a deﬁnition of force majeure which means at least an 
event beyond a party’
s control. In some detailed force 
majeure provisions this clause may list a number of 
different types of events which are likely to frustrate or delay the contract as well as a general reference to “matters outside the control o f... ” . 
The reference to an “Act of God” is sometimes left 
undeﬁned but is commonly perceived to mean an acci-dent due to natural causes without human interven-tion and which could not have been foreseen or resisted by human care and skill. Sometimes an attempt is made to quantify such events by reference to speciﬁc 
32Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 3(2), Measurement, Sampling and T
esting. 
33Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 13(3), Appointment of Experts. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 29

--- Page 790/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
periods of time. In some cases some events may be 
expressly excluded; the drafting of the clause depends on how much protection a party views is needed and whether there are any particular circumstances which need to be addressed, such as extreme weather condi
-
tions or engine breakdown preventing the buyer’s vessel arriving in time at the load port in an FOB contract; 
•	a mechanism for the giving of a notice of force majeure event to the other party
, specifying the time in which 
such a notice must be given from when the party became aware of the event and any supporting infor-mation that such party should provide; 
•	the obligations of a party once it has notiﬁed the other party of that force majeure event. For example, the 
party may be obliged to use its endeavours to remedy the situation before it claims relief; 
•	the consequences of force majeure . If a party is entitled 
to relief from its contractual obligations by virtue of force 
majeure both parties may want a right to suspend 
or possibly terminate the contract if a force majeure 
event lasts more than a certain period of time; 
•	(if the seller) that the buyer will be liable to pay for any 
of the oil already delivered; 
•	(if the seller) that force majeure covers delay or hin­
drance so that if the seller
’s own supplier fails to per-
form the seller will be relieved from liability. Above all, the seller will need to ensure that the force majeure 
provisions with its buyer reﬂect those that it has in its own supply contract with its supplier
. 
Example 
“Neither seller nor buyer shall be liable in damages or other-wise for any failure or delay in performance of any obligation hereunder other than obligation to make payment where such failure or delay is caused by force majeure , being any event, 
occurrence or circumstance reasonably beyond the control of that party including without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, failure or delay caused by or resulting from 
Acts of 
God, strikes, ﬁre, ﬂoods, wars (whether declared or unde-clared), riots, destruction of the oil, delays of carriers due to breakdown or adverse weather
, perils of the sea, embargoes, 
accidents, restrictions imposed by any governmental author-ity (including allocations priorities, requisitions, quotas and price controls). The time of seller to make, or buyer to receive, 
16.3/page 30	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 791/964 ---
16 Contracts
delivery hereunder shall be extended during any period in which delivery shall be delayed or prevented by reason of any of the foregoing causes, up to a total of thirty (30) days. If any delivery hereunder shall be delayed or prevented for more than 30 days, either party may terminate this contract with respect to such delivery upon written notice to the other party.”
34 
Commentary Force majeure is a commonly used term under English law
 , but 
it has no statutory or recognised legal deﬁnition. It is therefore up to the parties to agree a deﬁnition to be included in the con-tract. It will only be implied in law in the event that the contract is incapable of performance, for example, the seller
’s only source 
of supply – its only oil reﬁnery – is destroyed in an explosion. By way of contrast, a strike does not necessarily render the contract incapable of performance as it is a temporary interruption to supply. This will be one of the most important terms because it may relieve a party from its liability to perform part or all of its contractual obligations. 
If the contract is silent, or the circumstance so unenforce-
able or so destructive of the commercial purpose of the contract that it would be unjust to hold the parties to the contract, the law may recognise the contract as “frustrated”, i.e. terminated without fault on either side. The English doctrine of frustration is, however
, strict and narrow and may apply only in very limited 
circumstances such as destruction of the subject matter or super-vening impossibility due to government interference. Certain pro-visions of the Law Reform (Frustrated Contracts) Act, 1943 (e.g. the extent of recoverability of expenditures incurred under frus-trated contracts) may also be of concern to the parties. Thus it is advisable in respect of contracts subject to English law to con-sider the effect of the doctrine of frustration and draft a force 
majeure clause carefully in any oil trading contract. 
16.3.15 Restrictions 
Purpose To speciﬁcally restrict a party from supplying a product from or to a particular destination. 
34Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB Contract (2). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 31

--- Page 792/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Content 
The following terms may be included if required: 
•	a speciﬁc restriction may provide that oil may not be 
sold or delivered directly or indirectly to certain named countries or to any destinations which are “embargo destinations” at the time of disposal under the oil policy of the relevant government of production (e.g. the 
Arab 
boycott of Israel), process or manufacture. The effect of US/UN sanctions on Iraq should also be noted and their potential applicability taken into account; 
•	rights may be included to suspend a contract if by 
reason of government policy a party is unable to either supply or take delivery of oil produced (or products or feedstocks processed or manufactured) in a certain country; 
•	it may be appropriate for the contract to provide for the 
parties to meet to resolve the difﬁculty and then the 
seller may at its discretion suspend in whole or in part the supply; 
•	following delivery, the buyer may be required to provide the seller within a certain time period a “cer­
tiﬁcate, sometimes called a certiﬁcate of discharge” , 
which will show that the oil has been purchased under the agreement, and other relevant information such as the name of the loading and the discharge ports, the date of loading and discharge, details as to quantities and the vessel’
s name; 
•	a requirement specifying to what extent the certiﬁcate 
of discharge should be an ofﬁcial document. For ex-
ample, whether it needs to be attested by customs or a local chamber of commerce; 
•	where there is a failure to provide a certiﬁcate of dis­
charge , within a certain speciﬁed time. For example, 
within a certain period from the bill of lading date or within so many days after the seller
’s request, 
whichever is later. In the case of a term contract, the seller may wish to include the right to suspend further deliveries under the agreement. 
Examples 
(1) “It is a condition of the agreement that the oil pur-chased may not, in any event, be sold supplied or deliv-
16.3/page 32	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 793/964 ---
16 Contracts
ered, directly or indirectly, to any port or ports in the State of Israel or to any destination which at the time of disposal is declared an embargoed destination by the government of the country in which the oil is produced or a destination prohibited by the terms on which Sellers have acquired the oil, provided that if Buyers are, or are likely to be, prevented by any law, policy, demand or request to which they are subject to any governmental policy, demand or request by which Buyers reasonably consider they are bound from com-plying with the above, Sellers and Buyers shall meet and discuss the implications for Buyers and Sellers and, pending resolution of any difﬁculty which such law causes or is likely to cause, Sellers may at their discretion suspend in whole or in part supplies hereunder
. 
(2) Buyers shall provide Sellers with a certiﬁcate of dis-charge for the oil purchased under the agreement. The certiﬁcate of discharge shall be prepared on headed stationery by the vessel’
s agents at the discharge port 
and attested by an ofﬁcial seal and signature of the customs authorities or local Chamber of Commerce. The certiﬁcate of discharge shall reach Sellers within four months of the Bill of Lading date. 
The certiﬁcate of discharge should include the 
names of the loading and discharge ports, the dates of loading and discharge, the grades and volumes involved, the vessel name, details of lightering or ship-to-ship transfer if applicable, and the names of the vessel’
s agents at the discharge port and the 
consignee. In the event that any speciﬁc detail is not available, Buyers will provide separate advice to cover such omission. 
(3) Sellers shall have the right to suspend deliveries under this or subsequent or other agreements between Buyers and Sellers if satisfactory certiﬁcation is not received from Buyers within four months of the date of the Bill of Lading of the cargo concerned.”
35 
35Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 10, Destination, Restrictions and Certiﬁcation. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 33

--- Page 794/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
16.3.16 Duties and taxes 
Purpose To provide for which of the parties is to bear any of the taxes, duties or imposts or other charges in respect of the oil sold under the agreement. Content The following points should be included: 
•	the buyer is normally responsible in an FOB contract for all duties on the vessel and any taxes, duties, import fees on the oil after the oil has passed the vessel’
s permanent hose connection at the loading ter-
minal, though sometimes the seller is prepared to take a wider obligation (see attached Shell General T
erms 
and Conditions, for example); 
•	the relevant costs provision will normally cover any 
fees for formalities to be fulﬁlled to load/discharge the goods; 
•	a statement as to which goods the duty or costs apply and form part of the contract may be included if it is not clear from the terms of the contract. For example, in a long term contract where a number of shipments are to be made. 
Examples 
“(1) All taxes, duties and other imposts (other than those 
levied on the vessel) in respect of any oil sold under the terms of the agreement
36 in the country in which 
the loading port is situated shall be for the account of Sellers other than value added tax, goods and serv-ices tax or similar multi-stage consumption tax as Buyers are able to recover
. 
36Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 4(1), Risk and Property: 
“The risk and property in the oil supplied under the terms of the 
agreement shall pass to Buyers at the loading port as the oil passes the loading vessel’ 
s permanent hose.” 
16.3/page 34	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 795/964 ---
16 Contracts
(2) All other such charges including any taxes arising as 
a result of interest becoming due in accordance with Clause 5(3) shall be for the account of Buyers.”
37 
“Deliveries which, on request of Buyer, are made with exemption from excise duties, levies and/or taxes under cover of customs or excise documents issued by Seller, will take place at the exclusive responsibility of Buyer who is obliged to fully indemnify Seller for all duties, taxes, penalties, costs etc. which Seller might have to pay because of the absence of clearance of documents or other irregularities in the ﬁeld of customs, excise and VAT legislation, national as well as foreign and EEC legislation, and regardless any fault chargeable to Buyer. In case of resale Buyer will take care that new customs and/or excise documents are issued.”
38 
Commentary The liability will reﬂect the delivery arrangements. For example, up to the time of loading in an ex-ship contract it is normally the seller
’s responsibility to pay for all taxes, duties and other charges 
including export fees (other than those levied on the vessel) in respect of any oil sold under the terms of the agreement in the country in which the load port is situated in respect of the oil (except extra fees caused by ship, for example, lighterage). 16.3.17 Assignment 
Purpose To ensure that a party to the contract may not transfer its rights or obligations without either notifying or obtaining consent from the other party (under English law parties to a contract cannot assign their obligations and such intention will require novation: e.g. that the contract is not assignment of the old one, but a newcontract between the non-assigning party and the incoming party
. This may have signiﬁcance if the non-assigning party does 
37Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 6(1), Taxes, Duties and Imposts. 
38Appendix 16.1 Sample FOB Contract (1). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 35

--- Page 796/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
not insist on an indemnity from the incoming party in respect of 
all pre-novation liabilities – but they invariably do). 
To provide a procedure for assignment of rights or a trans -
fer of obligations. Content The following points should be included: 
•	a provision as to whether either party should have the right to assign with or without consent of the other 
party; 
•	where there is assignment (with or without consent) a 
typical provision would state that such assignment shall not be effective until the other party has been given written notice thereof; 
•	where the right to assign is qualiﬁed because it is 
subject to the other party’
s consent, the parties may 
wish to specify that consent should not be unreason-ably withheld and whether there are any other condi-tions which need to be satisﬁed, for example, whether the assignment should be contingent on the assignee being suitable to perform the terms of the contract; 
•	the consequences of assignment . 
 An assignment clause 
may also provide that the assignor (who is transferring the rights) will remain liable for the proper perform-ance of the agreement (or guarantee the assignee’s per-formance) even after the assignment. Such a provision is useful where the other party to the contract is con-cerned about the suitability of the assignee (including assignments to insubstantial afﬁliates). 
Examples 
“(1) Either party shall, having obtained the prior written 
consent of the other party have the right at any time to assign to another company all or part of the rights and obligations to sell and deliver or buy and receive the oil in accordance with the terms of the agreement. The assigning party shall remain responsible for the fulﬁlment of the terms and conditions of the agree-ment in accordance with paragraph (2) of this Clause 17. 
(2)	 Any such assignment shall be effected by notice 
in writing from the assignor countersigned by the 
16.3/page 36	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 797/964 ---
16 Contracts
assignee to signify its acceptance of the obligations under the agreement. Upon the making of any such assignment, the assignor shall remain bound to per-form or procure performance of the said obligations (as so accepted) by the assignee.’
39 
Commentary Both parties should be concerned to specify what each party’s rights to assign all or part of their respective rights (as opposed to their obligations) are under the agreement. If an assignment provision is not included then generally either party may assign all or any part of its rights without seeking the consent of the other party
. It is of obvious importance to both parties that they 
know who has rights and obligations under the contract and against whom those rights may be enforced when there is a dispute. 
Generally (as stated above) English law permits the assign-
ment of rights but not the transfer of its obligations without consent and therefore if the identity of the party is crucial to the contract (e.g. its credit worthiness, competence or whether the assignee is a potential competitor) the parties may wish to con-sider whether the right to assign is to be either excluded or care-fully qualiﬁed. 16.3.18 Liability 
Purpose To provide for the extent of each party’s liability which may arise in connection with its obligations under the contract. Content The following points should be considered: 
•	the seller may be particularly concerned to include 
limitations on its liability , which shall not exceed the 
value of the product (e.g. for liability arising with respect to offspec crude oil or demurrage). The seller 
39Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 17, Assignment. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 37

--- Page 798/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
may also be concerned to limit liability caused by his 
inability to fulﬁl contractual obligations due to poli -
tical restrictions/embargoes referred to in Section 16.3.15; 
•	both parties may wish to include an exclusion for lia­
bility for any indirect or consequential loss , specifying, 
for example, that neither party shall be liable for any direct, indirect or consequential losses or damages including, any special damages, loss of production or production of associated gas caused by non-offtake, any claims concerning reservoir damage caused by such shut-in, loss of proﬁts, caused by non-offtake or business interruptions which may be suffered or alleged to have been suffered by the other party
. The 
seller will be concerned to exclude its liability for pol-luting the port (if caused by the buyer); 
•	for the purposes of making a claim under the contract (notwithstanding the usual statutory period of limita-tion of six years) this period may be reduced by includ-ing an express provision specifying a time limit in 
which claims may be made . 
Example 
“(1) Neither party shall be liable for indirect, special or 
consequential damages. 
(2)	 Any claim in respect of a shortage in quantity or 
defect in the quality of oil will only be considered by Sellers if notice in writing of such claim is received by Sellers within forty ﬁve (45) days after the date of the Bill of Lading (Bill of Lading date equals day zero) for the particular cargo and such notice is followed by a fully documented claim to be received by Sellers within sixty (60) days after the date of the Bill of Lading (Bill of Lading date equals day zero). If Buyers’ 
fail to give notice of or to submit any such 
claim within the time limits, Buyer’s claim is deemed to be waived and any liability on the part of Sellers extinguished. Buyers shall only be entitled to recover costs, losses or damages from Sellers to the extent that Sellers are able to recover costs, losses or damages from Sellers’ suppliers and Sellers shall not be obliged to pay any amounts to Buyers in excess thereof. Sellers shall however use reasonable endeav-ours to recover from Sellers’ suppliers costs, losses or 
16.3/page 38	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 799/964 ---
16 Contracts
damages for which Buyers have presented a claim in accordance herewith. 
(3)	 In respect of any other claims relating to the failure 
to supply or of delay in supplying any quantity of oil for which Sellers are responsible, Buyers shall not be entitled to costs, losses or damages exceeding the agreed selling price for the oil under the agreement. Any claim in respect of the foregoing will only be con-sidered by Sellers provided that a fully documented claim is received within one year after the date of the occurrence.”
40 
Commentary As a general principle, it should be remembered that the rights and obligations of a contract may be enforced in the courts by bringing an action for damages where a party has suffered loss as a result of a breach of contract or by claiming speciﬁc per-formance of a contractual obligation. In addition to remedies arising from the rights and obligations speciﬁed in the contract, a person may also seek damages where a defendant has owed a duty of care towards that person and by his act or omission has caused some harm to that person. 16.3.19 Notices 
Purpose To provide how and to whom any notice or communication under the contract is to be given. Content The following points should be included: 
•	the type of communications to which the notice clause 
applies: whether it applies to all communications (e.g. all demands and communications including those relating to bills of lading) or only speciﬁed notices; 
•	the method of communication , and whether it will 
include post, hand delivery
, telex, facsimiles or other 
40Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 16, Limitation of Liability. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 39

--- Page 800/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
means of data transmission; the parties may consider 
whether some terms of transmission are inappropriate because they are unreliable: they may be illegible or subject to broken transmission or there may be no answer back facility; 
•	the chosen language of the notice ; 
•	each party’s details (if not already stated), including 
address, telex and facsimile numbers which may be required; 
•	a deeming of delivery provision so that where a notice 
is given in a certain way it is deemed delivered (unless proved to the contrary) in a certain time, for example a telex is deemed delivered on receipt of answer back. 
Example “Unless otherwise speciﬁcally provided, all notices to be given hereunder by either party to the other shall be sufﬁciently given if in writing, by telex, cable or facsimile and delivered to the other party as follow
s... ”41 
16.3.20 Governing law and dispute resolution 
Purpose To determine which governing law shall apply to the contract and to provide a procedure for resolving any disputes that might arise. Content To determine the consequences of a breach of a contract the parties may specify the governing law of the contract, for example: 
“This agreement is governed by and construed in accordance with English Law”. 
It should be noted that the Contracts (Applicable Law) 1990 Act which became effective on 1 April 1991, brought into force the 
41Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 19, Notices. 
16.3/page 40	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 801/964 ---
16 Contracts
Rome Convention which applies throughout the EU and changed the system of rules choosing the governing law of a contract where there is a choice between the laws of different countries. 
This Convention does not apply to all contracts and there 
are special rules, which apply to bills of lading and charterpar-ties. Article 3(1) states that the choice of law must be expressed or demonstrated with reasonable certainty
. Where the parties fail 
to state the governing law, then the contract will be governed by the law of the country with which the contract is most closely con-nected – this is presumed to mean the country where the party who is to effect the performance which is characteristic of the con-tract has residence, or, in the case of a company, has a central administration at the time of the contract. 
The agreement should further state how matters are to be 
resolved by adding, for example: 
“and the parties hereto agree to submit to the [exclusive/non-exclusive] jurisdiction of the English courts as regards any matter arising in respect hereof ”. 
It should be noted that the use of the words “non-exclusive” are generally used where the parties wish to ensure that they can sue each other in the English courts and also retain the option to bring an action in the courts of another jurisdiction.
42 
A submission to jurisdiction provision will not be appropri-
ate if the parties have agreed to refer all disputes to arbitration, unless of course only certain speciﬁed matters are to be referred in which case it may be helpful to speciﬁcally list them by refer-ence to the relevant clause. 
Where the parties wish to resolve a dispute by way of arbi-
tration, an arbitration clause should be included to require the 
42The use of the word “exclusive” means that the parties wish to 
ensure that they submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. Unfortunately the result of the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgement Act 1982 (which brought into effect the EEC Judgements Convention), makes the effect of using the words “non-exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts” no longer clear. Commentaries on cases ( Kurz v. Stella 
[1991] TLR 4 October, and Meeth v. Glacetal S.A.R.L. [1979] CMLR 520 
European Court) formed the view that the “non-exclusive” wording would not have the effect of conferring jurisdiction upon the English courts to the exclusion of courts of other Contracting States. The other Contracting States, apart from the UK, are: Belgium, Netherlands, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Spain and Portugal. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 41

--- Page 802/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
parties to submit to arbitration either generally under the agree -
ment or in respect of certain matters under the agreement. Such a provision may then refer to the Arbitration Act 1996, which con
-
trols the conduct of arbitrations (under English law), and/or to rules of a recognised arbitration agency (such as the Interna-tional Chamber of Commerce). The ICC recommends the inclu-sion of the following standard clause: 
“All disputes arising out or in connection with the present con-tract shall be ﬁnally settled under the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbi-trators appointed in accordance with the said Rules.”
43 
An example of a simple arbitration clause is as follows: 
“Any claim or dispute not settled by negotiation should be settled by arbitration in London before a single arbitrator, agreed upon by both parties or if not so agreed appointed in accordance with the English Arbitration Acts as amended from time to time”. 
Although terms may be implied by the Arbitration Acts, it is rec-ommended that the parties make more detailed provisions in the agreement, and the following points should also be included: 
•	the place of arbitration ; 
•	the number of arbitrators to be appointed and the 
method of appointment ; 
•	the procedure (
 i.e. voting ) to be applied by arbitrators 
while deciding upon matters; 
•	the law applicable to the merits of the dispute and the 
procedural law; 
•	the language to be used in the proceedings; 
•	the timetable for giving notice of arbitration, counter -
notice, the submission of evidence, the appointment of arbitrators and the time in which responses are to be given. The status of the arbitrator (whether he should 
be qualiﬁed, for example, as a QC or as an engineer); 
•	where the parties are unable to agree on the appoint-ment, which independent body shall appoint the arbi­
trator (e.g. the Institute of Petroleum); 
•	what should happen in the event of an arbitrator 
having a conﬂict of interest . 
43ICC Incoterms 2000 Edition. 
16.3/page 42	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 803/964 ---
16 Contracts
A detailed comparison of the different international venues and procedures for arbitration is contained in Chapter 17, Appendix 17.1. 
The parties should also consider whether they may wish 
certain matters to be resolved by an expert. Based on submission of parties, the appointment of an expert is usually reserved for more technical matters, whereas an arbitrator exercises a judi-cial function – whether or not he is an expert on the subject. An express provision in the contract is necessary for the procedure for appointment of an expert in the absence of any equivalent statutes (such as the 
Arbitration Acts) which may otherwise be 
relied on to imply any procedure. The following points should be considered: 
•	the types of matter in the contract which should be referred to an expert if there is a dispute. For example, 
a dispute concerning sampling and inspection or a price differential which the parties are unable to agree; 
•	how the appointment of the expert is to be made – if 
there is no agreement between the parties, which body shall appoint the expert (for example, the Interna-tional Chamber of Commerce or the President of the Institute of Petroleum in London); 
•	how the costs of the expert’s services are to be borne ; 
•	any procedural rules for making submissions to the 
expert and the time limit in which he is to render a decision; 
•	whether the expert’s decision is ﬁnal and binding . The 
parties may speciﬁcally provide for the expert’
s deci-
sion/determination to be non-binding in certain events (e.g. fraud, negligence).
It is up to the parties to decide whether arbitration is preferable to the courts. The advantages of arbitration include conﬁdential-ity and a limited right of appeal. However, arbitration may be slower than going to court or more expensive. It is also impor-tant to note that different jurisdictions have different rules for cost recovery
. 
16.3.21 Miscellaneous terms 
Agency for service of process Where one of the parties to the contract is resident outside England and W
ales and the other party may wish to take 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.3/page 43

--- Page 804/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
proceedings against such party, then a form of appointment in England and Wales for the service of process should be included. This avoids unnecessary administration where it would other-wise be necessary to apply to the High Court for leave to serve a writ outside the jurisdiction. Such a clause should specify the name and address of a speciﬁc agent of the party who has been appointed for the purpose of service of process. If, however
, the 
contract provides for arbitration, it is not necessary to have a service process agent provision.
44 
Sovereign immunity Where a party to the contract is a sovereign state or a govern-mental agency, amendments to standard clauses will often be necessary in order to reﬂect the status of the sovereign party con-cerned. A form of waiver of sovereign immunity clause should provide that, to the extent that the sovereign state may be enti-tled in any jurisdiction to claim for itself or its property or assets immunity in respect of its obligations under the agreement from legal action, the sovereign state agrees not to claim such immunity to the fullest extent permitted by the laws of such jurisdiction. Entire agreement In some contracts, an entire agreement clause is included which will state that the agreement is the entire agreement made 
44Under the Arbitration Act 1996 (Section 14 (3,4,5)), in the 
absence of any agreement between the parties to the contrary: (a)	 Where the arbitrator is named or designated in the arbitration agreement, arbitral proceedings are commenced in respect of a matter when one party serves on the other party or parties a notice in writing requiring him or them to submit that matter to the person so named or designated. 
(b) Where the arbitrator or arbitrators are to be appointed by the parties, arbitral proceedings are commenced in respect of a matter when one party serves on the other party or parties notice in writing requiring him or them to appoint an arbitrator or to agree to the appointment of an arbitrator in respect of that matter
. 
(c)	 Where the arbitrator or arbitrators are to be appointed by a person other than a party to the proceedings, arbitral proceed-ings are commenced in respect of a matter when one party gives notice in writing to that person requesting him to make the appointment in respect of that matter
. 
16.3/page 44	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 805/964 ---
16 Contracts
between the parties and neither party has relied on any other representations or warranties outside the agreement in entering into the agreement. Term and termination Once the delivery obligations have been discharged by the seller, the buyer has paid for the oil and the contract has been performed it will not be necessary to terminate the contract formally
. How-
ever, there may be reasons for which either party may want to terminate the contract prematurely – for example, because the contract has become uneconomic, or where one party has become insolvent or there has been a material breach by one party
. It is 
highly preferable that the contract speciﬁcally provides for these instances to provide a termination procedure, rather than to leave the matter to be determined by litigation (e.g. requiring a warning notice provision before litigating or terminating). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.3/page 45

--- Page 806/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 807/964 ---
16.4 Implied terms 
In addition to the express terms discussed above, there are also a number of terms that may be implied into a contract which 
confer rights and obligations that may not already be expressly stated in the contract. Express terms may seek to reduce the effect of such implied terms or exclude them as far as possible. 
The statutory implied terms examined in this section are of 
particular relevance to a physical oil sales contract. 16.4.1 UK Sale of Goods Act 
Brief reference to the UK Sales of Goods Act 1979 as amended by the Sale and Supply of Goods 
Act 1994 and by the Sale of 
Goods (Amendment) Act 1995 has already been made in the earlier sections on quality and title; this is because the 1979 Act lays down certain implied undertakings in a sale of goods con-tract which relate to matters such as title, description, quality and ﬁtness of goods. 
A sale of goods contract is deﬁned by s.2(1) of the 1979 Act, 
as: 
“a contract by which the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a money consideration, called the price”. 
While the key provisions are noted below, such implied terms may be excluded by the operation of express exclusion clauses. Exclusion of liability is however restricted under the Unfair Contract Terms Act (UCTA) 1977 although contracts which are classed as international supply contracts, a category which is par-ticularly relevant to oil trading contracts, are not subject to the same restrictions ( see below ). 
The following are examples of key terms which the 1979 
Act
45 implies into a sale of goods contract: 
•	Title (s.12) . There is an implied term on the part of 
the seller that in the case of sale, he has a right to sell the goods, and in the case of an agreement to sell, he will have such right at the time when the property is 
45 The Sale and Supply of Goods Act 1994 has made minor and con-
sequential amendments to the Sale of Goods Act 1979, which are reﬂected in the wording quoted. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.4/page 1

--- Page 808/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
to pass. If there is a breach of this section, the buyer 
of the goods is entitled to treat the contract as dis -
charged and claim damages.46 
•	Description (s.13) . Where there is a contract for the 
sale of goods by description, there is an implied term that the goods will correspond with the description. 
•	Quality and ﬁtness (s.14) . The goods supplied are of 
satisfactory quality and (subject to certain require-ments) reasonably ﬁt for the particular purpose for which they were bought. 
•	Property and risk (s.16, s.17, s.20 and s.20A) . 
Property will pass at such time as the parties intend it to pass. Such intention may be gathered from the terms of the contract or from the Rules in s.17 (“Prop-erty passes when intended to pass”) of the 1979 Act. 
Other implied terms relate to sales by sample, delivery obliga-tions, rights of an unpaid seller, re-sale, rescission and actions for breach of contract. 
If a party wishes to exclude a particular provision of the Sale 
of Goods 
Act 1979 (having regard to the Sale and Supply of Goods 
Act 1994 and Sale of Goods (Amendment) Act 1995) it must be aware of the effect of UCTA which precludes or restricts a party’s right to rely on certain exclusion clauses. UCTA s.13 indicates that it applies to a wide variety of clauses. The restrictions to note – which correspond to ss.13, 14 and 15 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 – relate to a seller’s undertaking as to title, which may never be excluded, s.6(1)(a), and liability for breach of sale by description. Implied terms about quality or ﬁtness for purpose and sale by sample may not be excluded as against a consumer and as against others only in so far as the clause satisﬁes the reasonableness test, ss.6(2) and 6(3). 
In an oil trading contract, it is unlikely that either party 
would be acting as a consumer because each party will normally be dealing in the course of business. The reasonableness test will therefore apply
. In s.11(1) of UCTA it is stated that: 
“the term shall have been a fair and reasonable one to be included having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contem-plation of the parties at the time the contract was made”. 
46This provision should be read in conjunction with the relevant 
provisions of Maritime legislation. 
16.4/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 809/964 ---
16 Contracts
Thus a seller may only exclude a term which states that if he sells the oil by description the oil must meet that description if it is reasonable in all the circumstances to do so. 
In many cases the oil trader is contracting with an overseas 
contractor
. If the contract is then categorised under UCTA as an 
“international supply contract” the effect of UCTA is excluded. An international supply contract is determined by a twofold test under s.26. Such a contract is either a contract of sale of goods or 
a contract under or in pursuance of which the possession or own-ership of goods passes and it is made by parties whose places of business (or
, if they have none, habitual residences) are in the 
territories of different States.47 A contract will meet these require-
ments if any of the following apply: 
•	the goods in question are, at the time of conclusion of the contract, in the course of carriage or will be carried from the territory of one State to another; or 
•	the acts constituting the offer and acceptance have been done in the territories of different States; or 
•	the contract provides for the goods to be delivered to the territory of a State other than that within whose territory those acts were done. 
If the oil trading contract fulﬁls these requirements the protec-tive provisions of UCTA will not apply. In this way, the Act recog-nises that parties in international trade are likely to be able to negotiate freely
. 
Although the 1979 Act is prima facie applicable to oil trading 
contracts, the exception to this rule is in the case of contracts for 
differences (CFDs) . Such contracts make no provision for deliv-
ery – because the cash settlement is made by reference to the movement of, say
, the IPE Brent Blend price index. It is not a 
contract for sale, like other futures contracts such as gas oil and gasoline. The contract for differences is deﬁned by the Financial Services Act 1986 and the contract rights are classiﬁed as an investment. If the contract is made on the exchange it may have the appearance of a wager and be unenforceable (s.18 of the Gaming Act 1845). 16.4.2 Maritime legislation 
Since many oil trading contracts will also be contracts for the car-riage of goods by sea, the provisions of the Carriage of Goods by 
47The Channel Islands and Isle of Man are treated as different 
States from the UK. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.4/page 3

--- Page 810/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Sea Act 1971 (“the 1971 Act”), which embodies the Hague–Visby 
Rules (“the Rules”), and the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1992 (“the 1992 Act”), which replaced the Bills of Lading Act 1855 and conﬁrms (s.5) the continuing effect of the Rules, are relevant. 
The Rules are contained in a Schedule to the 1971 Act and 
normally apply to a bill of lading or similar document of title in so far as such document relates to the carriage of goods by sea issued under or pursuant to a charterparty. Application of the Rules means they are incorporated into the contract. The Rules provide a minimum liability for the carrier and he cannot con-tract out although he may increase his liability. 
Pursuant to the Rules the carrier has three main duties to 
the bill of lading holder
. He must (Article II) exercise due dili-
gence to: 
(a) make the ship seaworthy; 
(b) properly man, equip and supply the ship; 
(c) make the ship ﬁt and safe for the reception carriage 
and preservation of cargo. 
In addition to the carrier’s responsibilities the Rules also pre-scribe many instances (Article IV) where the carrier will not be liable provided that unseaworthiness has not caused the loss or damage – for example, as a result of an 
Act of God or an inher-
ent vice of the goods. The carrier will not be able to escape lia-bility if loss or damage resulted from unseaworthiness, although particular rules allow deviation – for example, where there has been an attempt to save life at sea. 
The 1992 Act, which came into force on 16 September 1992, 
amended the position in respect of rights of suit relating to car-riage of goods by contracts. This is an important amendment because prior to the 1992 
Act only the party to the contract of 
carriage could bring an action. The 1992 Act updated on the posi-tion so that the holder of a bill of lading (or sea way bill or ship’s delivery order) has transferred and vested in him all rights of suit under the contract of carriage as if he had been a party to that contract (s.2). Conversely
, that person who now has the right to 
sue will also have liabilities if he had been a party to the contract of carriage (s.3). 16.4.3 The Vienna Convention 
Parties to an oil trading contract also need to consider the effect of the V
ienna Convention – its formal title being the United 
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of 
16.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 811/964 ---
16 Contracts
Goods. This was signed in Vienna in 1980 and came into opera-tion on 1 January 1988. The Convention applies to contracts of sale of goods between parties whose places of business are in dif-ferent States: 
•	when the States are Contracting States; or 
•	when the rules of private international law lead to the application of the law of a Contracting State. 
Although the UK has not ratiﬁed or acceded to the Convention, it may still apply to contracts because one of the contracting parties has a place of business in a state that has ratiﬁed or acceded to the Convention. The effect of the Convention on a con-tract may be signiﬁcant – it contains numerous provisions that do not exist in the 1979 
Act, which deal with the rights and obli-
gations of both a seller and buyer. 
For example, an obligation is imposed on the buyer to 
examine goods within as short a period as is practicable in the circumstances (Article 38) or where goods delivered do not conform to the contract, the buyer has a unilateral right to reduce the price in the same proportion as the sale of the goods actually delivered bears to that which the conforming goods would have had at the time of delivery (Article 50). 
A number of important trading countries are parties to the 
V
ienna Convention, including the USA, the Russian Federation, 
Belarus, Germany, Australia and China. 
These countries are bound by the Convention’s terms unless 
they have excluded it in whole or in part (Article 6). T
o determine 
the extent to which a contract will be subject to the Convention, where at least one contracting party is from a country that rati-ﬁed or acceded to the Convention, and the law of the ratifying or acceding country is stated in the contract to apply
, the national 
law will have to be considered in order to establish whether the Convention has been incorporated into that law in its entirety or if parts have been excluded. There is a risk that the Convention’s provisions may apply because the parties have inadvertently failed to exclude it. 
As a general rule the Convention seems to be tipped in 
favour of a buyer
. If the parties wish to exclude it a simple clause 
may be used which states that: 
“the United Nations Convention on contracts for the Inter-national Sale of Goods (1980) shall not apply”. 
Another Convention that the UK has not ratiﬁed, but which may also apply, is the Convention adopting the United Nations 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.4/page 5

--- Page 812/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale 
of Goods 1974 amended by protocol at the same time as the (Vienna) Convention. This replaces national laws, providing a limitation period of four years in which a buyer may bring its action for a contractual claim. Like the (Vienna) Convention there is a risk that even though a country has not ratiﬁed it, the Con
-
vention may still apply unless expressly excluded. 
16.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 813/964 ---
16.5 Incorporated terms 
In addition to implied terms, the parties may also wish to incor­
porate terms that would otherwise not apply unless expressly 
incorporated into the contract. These differ from implied terms, which will always apply unless the parties exclude them. An obvious example of incorporated terms is where a party expressly incorporates its standard trading terms, for example, Shell’s General Conditions for the Sale of Brent Blend Crude Oil on 15-Day Terms, 1990. 16.5.1 Incoterms 
In order to interpret shorthand expressions, such as FOB and CIF
, that are used in a contract – particularly when the parties 
are from different countries – the International Chamber of Com-merce developed a set of rules called the International Rules for the Interpretation of T
rade Terms. These are known as Incoterms 
and were ﬁrst published in 1936, subsequently amended in 1953, 1967, 1976, 1980, 1990 and most recently amended in 2000. 
The terms are divided into four different categories ( see 
below ) and set out buyers’ 
and sellers’ responsibilities and obli -
gations under a particular type of contract. 
If the parties wish to include a published set of Incoterms 
the contract should refer to the date of the edition; for example: 
“This Contract is subject to Incoterms 2000 Edition”. 
The contract should also state on what basis the goods are being sold, for example, “FOB” or “CFR” so that it is clear which rules apply, for example, “Incoterms 2000 FOB Rotterdam”. It is not possible to “pick and choose” which terms apply to the contract – it must be the whole set under the particular category. In draft-ing a contract there may be other rules which the parties wish to apply in addition to the Incoterms such as the sellers’ 
standard 
conditions of sale. Where such conditions of sale are expressly stated to apply then the order in which they, Incoterms and the contract terms prevail and priority in the event of conﬂict should be expressly addressed. 
The four categories of Incoterms are called: •	“E Terms” (Ex works) whereby the seller makes the 
goods available to the buyer at the seller
’s own 
premises. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.5/page 1

--- Page 814/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
•	“F Terms” (free carrier, free alongside ship, free on 
board) whereby the seller is called upon to deliver the goods to a carrier appointed by the buyer. 
•	“C Terms” (cost and freight, cost, insurance and freight, carriage paid to, carriage and insurance paid to) whereby the seller has to contract for carriage, but without assuming the risk of loss or damage to the goods or additional costs due to events occurring after shipment and despatch. 
•	“D Terms” (delivered at frontier, delivered ex ship, delivered ex quay
, delivered duty unpaid, delivered 
duty paid) whereby the seller has to bear all costs and risks needed to bring the goods to the country of destination. 
The obligations of the parties for each term are grouped under the same main headings of “the seller must” and “the buyer must”. 
There are ten obligations which may fall upon the parties 
and these are numbered with the headings as follows: A1	 Provision of goods in B1 Payment of the price 
conformity with the contract 
A2 Licences, authorisations B2 Licences, authorisations 
and formalities and formalities 
A3 
Contract of carriage and B3 Contract of carriage insurance 
A4 Delivery B4 Taking delivery 
A5 Transfer of risks B5 Transfer of risks A6 Division of costs B6 Division of costs A7 Notice to the buyer B7 Notice to the seller A8 Proof of delivery, B8 Proof of delivery, trans-
transport document port document or 
or equivalent equivalent electronic 
electronic message message 
A9 Checking-packaging- B9 Inspection of goods 
marking 
A10 
Other obligations B10 Other obligations 
There is no legal obligation on the parties to include Incoterms and Incoterms will not cover all obligations in respect of delivery of goods, for example: there is no provision on the passing of title or force majeure or the applicable law of a contract. They do 
however provide a simple set of rules to regulate complex 
16.5/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 815/964 ---
16 Contracts
arrangements for the sale of goods which can be used in addition to a party’s existing contract terms or conditions of sale ( see also 
Chapter 17 ). 
16.5.2 Letters of credit 
The use of letters of credit may also require detailed provisions in the contract. There are three aspects of the letter of credit to consider: the obligation to provide the letter of credit, its terms and how the letter of credit is presented. The obligation to provide the letter of credit should specify: 
•	that payment under the contract is to be made by means of an irrevocable letter of credit in favour of the seller; 
•	with whom the letter of credit is to be opened or by whom conﬁrmed; normally “an international bank ac-ceptable to the seller”; 
•	by when the letter of credit is to be provided – for example within so many days of receipt of a notice from the seller to the buyer; 
•	the currency of the letter of credit and its value; if the contract states “the total purchase price of the oil deliv-ered hereunder” that may be unknown or too uncer-tain at the time the letter of credit is required; 
•	a statement that the buyer (normally) is to cover all costs, commissions, banks fees, etc., of obtaining the letter of credit; 
•	the effect of failure to provide the letter of credit; if the seller has already accepted a nominated vessel, is ready to load but has not received the letter of credit the seller will need to protect its position by stating that it shall not be obliged to commence loading the oil. The seller should also require an indemnity from the buyer for demurrage and any other costs, losses or damages which it incurs as a result of any delay in pro-vision of the letter of credit. 
In addition to the obligation to provide a letter of credit, the con-tract should provide for a procedure for presentation of a letter of credit stating: 
•	a requirement for conﬁrmation from the bank provid-ing the letter of credit to the seller that the letter of credit will not affect the validity of the contract; 
•	when the letter of credit is to be issued. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 16.5/page 3

--- Page 816/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Normally , a letter of credit will be honoured by the issuing (or 
conﬁrming) bank against the presentation of the seller’s shipping documents – which will include the original bill of lading and certiﬁcates as to quantity, quality and (possibly) origin. If it is unlikely that the shipping documents will be available timeously, then the seller is normally obliged to issue a letter of indemnity. The form of letter of credit and letter of indemnity may be agreed in advance and attached in a schedule or appendix to the contract. 
Examples 
“Payment shall be by means of an irrevocable Letter of Credit in favour of the Seller which the Buyer shall cause to be opened with or conﬁrmed by an international bank acceptable to the Seller in the terms and by the time speciﬁed in clause [ ] and the currency speciﬁed for payment in clause [ ]” “Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in the special provisions, Sellers shall be entitled at any time, including, but not limited to, circumstances falling within [ ] by written notice to Buyer to require Buyer to establish an irrevocable Letter of Credit in favour of Seller
, in a form 
acceptable to Seller with a United States or international bank acceptable to Seller, for the total purchase price of the Oil to be delivered hereunder. All related opening, advising and conﬁrming bank fees, commissions, costs, and expenses whatsoever shall be borne by Buyer. After the receipt of said notice from Seller, Buyer shall establish such Letter of Credit and cause the same to be received by Seller at least ﬁve (5) days before the scheduled loading of the Oil. Notwithstand-ing any vessel nominations or loading instructions which may have been submitted by Buyer and accepted by Seller here-under, Seller shall not be obliged to commence the loading of any Oil, the payment for which Buyer is required to establish a Letter of Credit hereunder
, until after said Letter of Credit 
is received, examined and found to be acceptable by Seller. Seller shall promptly make said examination and notify the Buyer of any deﬁciencies. In the event that such Letter of Credit is not established as required herein, the Seller shall have no obligation to deliver the Oil to Buyer and the Seller shall have no liability whatsoever to Buyer for non-delivery; Buyer shall indemnify Seller for demurrage or other costs, losses or damages incurred by Seller as a result of any delay or deferment of loading under this Section.”
48 
48Amoco FOB Contract. 
16.5/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 817/964 ---
16 Contracts
Payment may also be covered by the buyer providing a bank or parent company guarantee, although the payment will remain the primary liability of the buyer. In this way the guarantee is similar to the letter of credit. In either case, the seller should con-sider including a provision that the buyer will be required to provide a performance bond (in an agreed form) to be issued in the event of late or nonpayment. 
Invoices will be prepared on the basis of the certiﬁcates of 
quality and quantity
. The buyer should be required to pay against 
presentation of the issue of such documents or the seller’s letter of indemnity if not all the shipping documents are available at the time of presentation. 16.5.3 Pollution 
The International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation Limited (ITOPF) is a provider of a broad range of specialised technical services in the ﬁeld of marine oil pollution (e.g. assessment of damage caused by spills and the resulting claims for compensa-tion) to and on behalf of its tanker owner members and their P & I Clubs. The 1992 International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage (the 1992 Civil Liability Convention) governs the liability of shipowners for oil pollution damage and creates a system of compulsory liability insurance. The 1992 International Convention on the Establishment of an Interna-tional Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage (the 1992 Fund Convention), which is supplementary to the 1992 Civil Lia-bility Convention, establishes a regime, which in the event of oil spill, provides for compensating those suffering oil pollution damage who are resident in a State that is party to the 1992 Fund Convention when the compensation under the applicable 1992 Civil Liability Convention is inadequate. The International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund 1992 (the 1992 Fund) was set up under the 1992 Fund Convention. The levy of contributions is based on reports of oil receipts in respect of individual contribu-tors. This applies whether the receiver of oil is a government authority
, a state-owned company or a private company. Except 
in the case of associated persons (subsidiaries and commonly con-trolled entities), a person is not required to make contributions in respect of the oil imported or received by him in any year if the oil so imported or received in the year does not exceed 150,000 tonnes. The Merchant Shipping 
Act 1995 (Chapter 173) provides 
for oil importers to pay into the 1992 Fund. 
The Merchant Shipping Act 1995 enables the UK to give 
effect to the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil 
Supplement 8 May 2002 16.5/page 5

--- Page 818/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Pollution Damage 1992. When oil escapes from a ship carrying 
persistent oil in bulk as a cargo the Act imposes strict liability on a ship owner for damage caused by oil pollution and also for the cost of measures taken to prevent or minimise such damage. 
Example Buyer warrants and undertakes that (for each vessel nominated to carry a cargo) the vessel is owned or demise chartered by a member of the International T
anker Owners Pollution Federa-
tion Limited (ITOPF). 
“Buyer shall exercise reasonable efforts to ensure that: 
(a) the vessel carries on board a valid certiﬁcate of insur-
ance as described in the 1969 Civil Liability Conven-tion for Oil Pollution Damage and the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1992; 
(b) the vessel has in place insurance cover for oil pollution 
no less in scope and amounts than the highest avail-able under the Rules of P & I Clubs entered into the International Group of P 
& I Clubs. 
If Buyer’s vessel does not meet any of the above requirements Seller or Seller
’s suppliers may refuse to berth or load or continue 
to load the vessel with the scheduled loading.”49 
49Shell International Trading Company General Terms and Con-
ditions of the Sale of Crude Oil, FOB (1st January 1993) with amend-ments dated 25th November, 1999, Clause 7, Vessel Nomination. 
16.5/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 819/964 ---
Appendix 16.1 Sample FOB contract (1) 
TO: SELLERCO, LONDON ATTN: MR S. SELLER TO: BUYERCO, ROTTERDAM ATTN: MS B. BUYER WE HAVE PLEASURE IN CONFIRMING THE FOLLOWING TRANSACTION: 01. SELLERS
––––––––––––
[SELLER’S COMP
ANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
02. BUYERS
––––––––––––
[BUYER’S COMP
ANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
03. INTERMEDIARY
––––––––––––
BROKERCO, BROKERBURG
04. PRODUCT
––––––––––––
LIGHT FUEL 
OIL ON EEC BASIS
05. QUALITY
––––––––––––
SPEC. GRA
V. /15 DEG C 0.9858
SULPHUR WT PCT 0.4
VISC. /50 DEG C CST 25.2
ASH WT PCT 0.04
CCR WT PCT 4.6
COLOUR BLACK
FLASH POINT DEG C 67
POUR POINT DEG C-24
SEDIMENT WT PCT 0.07
VISC. /20 DEG C CST 125.3
TOTAL CHLORINE 4
WATER PCT VOL <0.1
FURTHER NORMAL COMMERCIAL QUALITY 06. QUANTITY
–––––––––––––
CA. [QUANTITY] MT – T
ANK TO BE EMPTIED
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.1/page 1

--- Page 820/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
07. LIFTING
–––––––––––
PX TANK NNN TANKCO AMSTERDAM BY BARGES TO BE
PROVIDED BY BUYERS FOR LIFTING BETWEEN [DATE
RANGE] BOTH DATES INCLUSIVE.
08. PRICE
–––––––––
USD [PRICE] FOB T
ANKCO AMSTERDAM ON EEC BASIS
EXCL. ANY DUTIES
09. PAYMENT
–––––––––––––
P
AYMENT TO BE MADE IN FULL WITHOUT DEDUCTION
SET OFF OR COUNTER CLAIM NET CASH IN USDLRS
WITH VALUE LATEST FIVE CALENDAR DAYS AFTER B/L
DATE AGAINST TELEX INVOICE, BUYERS TO OPEN AN
IRREVOCABLE BANK GUARANTEE IN FAVOUR OF
SELLERS WITH BOTH BANK AND TEXT TO BE
ACCEPTABLE TO SELLERS.
10. DETERMINATION OF QUANTITY/QUALITY
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
AS 
ASCERTAINED BY LOADING INSTALLATION (QUALITY
AS STIPULATED UNDER ITEM 05) IS BINDING FOR BOTH
PARTIES.
11. GENERAL
–––––––––––––
A) 
OVERTIME, IF ANY NOT FOR ACCOUNT OF SELLERS.
B) ANY NOMINATION TO REACH BUYERS WITH AT
LEAST TWO WORKING DAYS NOTICE. 
C) 
LAYTIME AND DEMURRAGE AS PER TTN RULES. 
D) INCOTERMS 2000 PLUS LATEST AMENDMENTS TO 
APPLY. 
E) DELIVERIES WHICH, ON REQUEST OF BUYER, ARE 
MADE WITH EXEMPTION FROM EXCISE DUTIES, LEVIES 
AND/OR TAXES UNDER COVER OF CUSTOMS 
OR EXCISE DOCUMENTS ISSUED BY SELLER, WILL TAKE PLACE AT THE EXCLUSIVE RESPONSIBILITY OF BUYER WHO IS OBLIGED TO FULLY INDEMNIFY SELLER FOR ALL DUTIES, TAXES, PENALTIES, COSTS ETC WHICH SELLER MIGHT HAVE TO PAY BECAUSE OF THE ABSENCE OF CLEARANCE OF DOCUMENTS OR OTHER IRREGULARITIES IN THE FIELD OF CUSTOMS, EXCISE AND VAT LEGISLATION, NATIONAL 
Appendix 16.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 821/964 ---
16 Contracts
AS WELL AS FOREIGN AND EEC LEGISLATION, AND REGARDLESS ANY FAULT CHARGEABLE TO BUYER. 
F) IN CASE OF RESALE BUYER WILL TAKE CARE THAT 
NEW CUSTOMS 
AND/OR EXCISE DOCUMENTS ARE 
ISSUED. 
G) BUYER AGREES TO IMMEDIATELY INFORM SELLER 
OF THE DA
TE OF CLEARANCE AND THE CUSTOMS 
OFFICE WHERE THE CLEARANCE TOOK PLACE, AS WELL AS OF THE SUBSTITUTION OF THE CUSTOMS AND/OR EXCISE DOCUMENT. 
WE THANK YOU FOR THIS DEAL. REGARDS, BROKERCO. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.1/page 3

--- Page 822/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 823/964 ---
Appendix 16.2 Sample FOB contract (2) 
[DATE] TO: SELLERCO, SELLERTOWN ATTN: MR S. SELLER WE ARE PLEASED TO CONFIRM THE RECENT TRANSAC-TION CONCLUDED UNDER THE FOLLOWING TERMS AND CONDITIONS: 01. SELLER: 
[SELLER’S COMPANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
02. BUYER: 
[BUYER’S COMPANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
03. COVERING: 
[QUANTITY] MTS PLUS/MINUS 5 PERCENT SELLERS OPTION [ORIGIN] STRAIGHT RUN FUEL 
OIL 
04. QUALITY: 
UNITS TEST RESULT TEST 
METHOD ASTM 
SP. GR. 60/60 DF MAX 0.97 D-1298 
VISCO RWI AT 100 DF SEC MAX 2500 CALCULATED 
VISCO KIN AT 122 DF CST MAX 180 D-445 
FLASH POINT DF MIN 140 D-93 
POUR POINT DF MAX 75 D-97 
SULPHUR TOTAL WT PCT MAX 3.5 D-1552 
CARBON RES. WT PCT MAX 12 D-189 
ASH WT PCT MAX 0.05 D-482 
SEDIMENT BY EXT. WT PCT MAX 0.1 D-473 
WATER CONTENT VOL PCT MAX 0.5 D-95 
CALORIFIC VALUE BTU/LB MIN 18000 CALCULATED 
05. SHIPMENT: 
BY SHIP TO SHIP OPERATION AT A SELLER DESIGNA
TED LIGHTERING POSITION OFFSHORE 
[LIGHTERING LOCATION] [COUNTRY] DURING THE PERIOD [DATE RANGE]. ALL COSTS RELATED TO THE 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.2/page 1

--- Page 824/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
SHIP TO SHIP TRANSFER WILL BE ENTIRELY FOR 
SELLER’S ACCOUNT, I.E. SUPPLY OF FENDERS ETC. 
06. PRICE: 
FOB BY SHIP TO SHIP OPERATION [LIGHTERING LOCATION] EX SELLER’S VESSEL [SELLERS SHIP NAME] AND/OR SUBSTITUTE TO BUYER’S VESSEL [BUYERS SHIP NAME] OR SUBSTITUTE. PRICE: THE FIVE DAY ARITHMETIC AVERAGE OF THE MEAN OF PLA
TT’S HIGH AND LOW QUOTATIONS FOR 
ARABIAN GULF FOB HIGH SULPHUR FUEL OIL 180 CST CARGOES AS PUBLISHED IN PLATT’S EUROPEAN MARKETSCAN PLUS [PRICE DIFFERENTIAL] US DOLLARS PER METRIC TON. THE FIVE QUOTATIONS USED SHALL BE THE BILL OF LADING DATE, TWO DAYS PRIOR AND TWO DAYS AFTER THE BILL OF LADING DATE OF THE [SELLERS SHIP NAME] OR SUBSTITUTE AT THE LOADING PORT [LOAD PORT]. IN THE EVENT THAT THERE IS NO PLATT’S PUBLICATION ON THE BILL OF LADING DATE THEN ONLY FOUR EFFECTIVE QUOTATIONS SHALL BE USED, I.E. TWO BEFORE AND TWO AFTER THE BILL OF LADING DATE. 
07. PAYMENT: 
IN US DOLLARS IN FULL WITHOUT DISCOUNT SET OFF OR COUNTERCLAIM TO SELLER’S NOMINATED BANK ACCOUNT BY AN IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT AS DEFINED BELOW. PAYABLE VALUE 15 DAYS FROM BILL OF LADING DATE. BILL OF LADING DATE FOR PAYMENT PURPOSES REFERS TO THE BILL OF LADING OF THE [SELLERS SHIP NAME] LOADING AT [LOAD PORT]. BILL OF LADING DATE TO COUNT AS ZERO AGAINST PRESENTATION OF COMMERCIAL INVOICE AND SHIPPING DOCUMENTS. IN THE EVENT NORMAL SHIPPING DOCUMENTS ARE NOT AVAILABLE, SELLER SHALL ISSUE A LETTER OF INDEMNITY TO THE BUYER BY WHICH PAYMENT MAY BE MADE. IN THE EVENT PAYMENT DATE FALLS ON A SATURDAY OR BANK HOLIDAY IN NEW YORK OTHER THAN A MONDAY PAYMENT WILL BE EFFECTED PREVIOUS WORKING DAY. IN THE EVENT PAYMENT 
Appendix 16.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 825/964 ---
16 Contracts
FALLS DUE ON A SUNDAY OR MONDAY BANK HOLIDAY IN NEW YORK PAYMENT WILL BE EFFECTED THE FOLLOWING WORKING DAY. BUYERS TO OPEN AN IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT BY 
A FIRST CLASS WESTERN BANK 
ACCEPTABLE TO SELLERS AND IN A FORMAT ACCEPTABLE TO SELLERS. DUE TO TIME CONSTRAINTS IT IS IMPORTANT THAT SELLERS OPEN THEIR LETTER OF CREDIT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AND THAT IT BE FIRMLY IN PLACE WITH ALL DETAILS TO SELLERS SATISFACTION BY NO LATER THAN [DATE BEFORE FIRST DAY OF LOADING DATE RANGE]. ALL COSTS RESULTING FROM OPENING THE LETTER OF CREDIT WILL 
BE FOR BUYER’S ACCOUNT 
WHEREAS COSTS FOR NEGOTIATION WILL BE FOR SELLER’S ACCOUNT. IN THE EVENT THAT AN ACCEPTABLE DOCUMENTARY LETTER OF CREDIT IS NOT TIMELY RECEIVED BY SELLER AND AS A RESULT THE VESSEL LOADING OR DISCHARGING IS DELAYED, ALL ATTENDANT CHARGES INCLUDING DEMURRAGE INCURRED WILL BE FOR THE ACCOUNT OF THE BUYER. 
08. LAYTIME AND DEMURRAGE: 
LAYTIME 48 HOURS PLUS 6 HOURS NOR. DEMURRAGE 
AS PER PERFORMING VESSEL 
CHARTER PARTY TERMS AND CONDITIONS. LAYTIME SHALL COMMENCE ONLY UPON THE ARRIVAL OF THE SELLER’S NOMINATED VESSEL AT THE INTENDED LIGHTERING POSITION AT [LIGHTERING LOCATION]. 
09. DETERMINATION OF QUANTITY/QUALITY: 
QUALITY AS DETERMINED BY [ORIGINAL SUPPLIER] AT LOADING PORT [LOAD PORT]. LOAD PORT QUALITY TO BE FINAL AND BINDING ON BOTH PARTIES. QUANTITY FOR BILL OF LADING SHALL BE DETERMINED BY AN INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR [INSPECTOR NAME] OR OTHER MUTUALLY AGREED INSPECTOR. THE DEEMED B/L QUANTITY SHALL BE THE AVERAGE OF THE MOTHER VESSEL’S SHIP’S 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.2/page 3

--- Page 826/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
FIGURES AND THE RECEIVING VESSEL’S SHIP’S 
FIGURES. THE RESULTING QUANTITY, CONFIRMED BY THE INSPECTORS, WILL BE CONSIDERED AS FINAL B/L QUANTITY, TO BE FINAL AND BINDING FOR BOTH PARTIES. INSPECTION COSTS TO BE SHARED 50/50 BETWEEN SELLER/BUYER. 
10. TITLE AND RISK: 
TITLE AND RISK SHALL PASS FROM SELLER TO BUYER WHEN CARGO PASSES BETWEEN SHIPS PERMANENT FLANGE CONNECTION AT LOAD PORT [LIGHTERING LOCATION]. 
11. LAW: 
THIS CONTRACT SHALL BE GOVERNED BY ENGLISH LAW WITH JURISDICTION IN THE HIGH COURT OF LONDON. 
12. FORCE MAJEURE: 
NEITHER SELLER NOR BUYER SHALL BE LIABLE IN DAMAGES OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY FAILURE OR DELAY IN PERFORMANCE OF ANY OBLIGATION HEREUNDER OTHER THAN OBLIGATION TO MAKE PAYMENT WHERE SUCH FAILURE OR DELAY IS CAUSED BY FORCE MAJEURE, BEING ANY EVENT, OCCURRENCE OR CIRCUMSTANCE REASONABLY BEYOND THE CONTROL OF THAT PARTY INCLUDING WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, FAILURE OR DELAY CAUSED BY OR RESULTING FROM ACTS OF GOD, STRIKES, FIRE, FLOODS, WARS (WHETHER DECLARED OR UNDECLARED), RIOTS, DESTRUCTION OF THE OIL, DELAYS OF CARRIERS DUE TO BREAKDOWN OR ADVERSE WEATHER, PERILS OF THE SEA, EMBARGOES, ACCIDENTS, RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY ANY GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY (INCLUDING ALLOCATIONS PRIORITIES, REQUISITIONS, QUOTAS AND PRICE CONTROLS). THE TIME OF SELLER TO MAKE, OR BUYER TO RECEIVE, DELIVERY HEREUNDER SHALL BE EXTENDED DURING ANY PERIOD IN WHICH DELIVERY SHALL BE DELAYED OR PREVENTED BY REASON OF ANY OF THE FOREGOING CAUSES, UP TO A TOTAL OF THIRTY (30) DAYS. IF ANY DELIVERY HEREUNDER SHALL BE DELAYED OR PREVENTED FOR MORE THAN 30 DAYS, 
Appendix 16.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 827/964 ---
16 Contracts
EITHER PARTY MAY TERMINATE THIS CONTRACT WITH RESPECT TO SUCH DELIVERY UPON WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OTHER PARTY. 
13. OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS: 
WHERE NOT IN CONFLICT WITH THE ABOVE, INCO TERMS 2000 WTH SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS TO APPLY. 
14. MISCELLANEOUS: 
CERTIFICATES OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY WILL BE PROVIDED BY SUR
VEYOR IN ATTENDANCE. IT IS 
THE BUYER’S RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE ARRANGEMENTS WITH THE ATTENDING SURVEYOR FOR ANY OTHER DOCUMENTATION WHICH MAY BE REQUIRED. 
PLEASE CONFIRM YOUR AGREEMENT TO THE TERMS OF
THIS CONTRACT
.
REGARDS,
B. BUYER, BUYERCO.
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.2/page 5

--- Page 828/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 829/964 ---
Appendix 16.3 Sample CIF contract 
TO: SELLERCO, LONDON ATTN: MR S. SELLER 
TO: BUYERCO, ROTTERDAM ATTN: MS B. BUYER FROM: BROKERCO, LONDON ON BEHALF OF BROKERCO WE CONFIRM THE FOLLOWING TRANSACTION: 01. SELLERS
––––––––––––
[SELLER’S COMP
ANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
02. BUYERS
––––––––––––
[BUYER’S COMP
ANY NAME]
[REGISTERED ADDRESS]
03. PRODUCT
–––––––––––––
PREMIUM UNLEADED MOTOR GASOLINE
04. QUANTITY
––––––––––––––
[QUANTITY] MT +
/-5% SELLERS OPTION
05. QUALITY
––––––––––––
PRODUCT TO MEET EN228 SPECIFICA
TION FOR
PREMIUM UNLEADED CLASS 2 GASOLINE
06. DELIVERY
–––––––––––––
CIF BASIS [DELIVER
Y LOCATION] IN ONE LOT DURING
THE PERIOD [DATE RANGE]. SELLER TO GIVE TWO
WORKING DAYS NOTICE OF VESSELS ARRIVAL AT
DISCHARGE PORT.
07. PRICE
––––––––––
US DOLLARS [PRICE] PER METRIC TON BASED ON B/L
QUANTITY CIF [DELIVER
Y LOCATION]. PRICE TO
ESCALATE DE-ESCALATE ON A DENSITY OF 0.7550
AGAINST ACTUAL CARGO DENSITY REPORTED ON THE
B/L.
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 16.3/page 1

--- Page 830/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
08. PAYMENT
––––––––––––
US DOLLARS NET CASH BY TELEGRAPHIC TRANSFER
WITH V
ALUE LATEST THREE WORKING DAYS AFTER
DISCHARGE OR FIVE WORKING DAYS AFTER NOR
TENDERED IN PORT (WHICHEVER FIRST) AGAINST
SELLERS INVOICE AND USUAL SHIPPING DOCUMENTS
OR SELLERS LOI FOR TEMPORARILY MISSING
DOCUMENTS. BUYERS TO OPEN AN IRREVOCABLE
LETTER OF CREDIT IN FAVOUR OF SELLERS WITH BOTH
BANK AND TEXT TO BE ACCEPTABLE TO SELLERS.
09. DETERMINATION OF QUANTITY/QUALITY
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
AS 
ASCERTAINED AT LOADPORT BY INDEPENDENT
INSPECTOR WHOSE FINDINGS TO BE FINAL AND
BINDING. COSTS AT LOADPORT FOR SELLERS ACCOUNT.
AT DISCHARGE PORT FOR BUYERS ACCOUNT.
10. LAYTIME
––––––––––––
36 HOURS SHINC
50 PLUS 6 HOURS NOR.
11. DEMURRAGE
––––––––––––––––
AS PER CHARTER P
ARTY RATE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
12. OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
A) 
THIS CONTRACT SHALL BE GOVERNED AND
INTERPRETED BY ENGLISH LAW (WITHOUT
CONFLICT OF 
ANY LAW RULES).
B) JURISDICTION: EACH PARTY EXPRESSLY SUBMITS 
TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE LONDON HIGH COURT
. 
C) SELLERS TO PROVIDE FIRST CLASS MARINE 
INSURANCE TO COVER 
ALL RISKS, LEAKAGE, AND 
OR SHORTAGE IN EXCESS OF 0.5 PERCENT FOR MINIMUM 110 PERCENT INVOICE VALUE. 
WE THANK YOU FOR THIS BUSINESS. BEST REGARDS, BROKERCO. 
50SHINC: Sundays and holidays included. Also SHEXUU: Sundays 
and holidays excluded unless used. 
Appendix 16.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 831/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues 
Blanche Sas Updated by Malcolm Groom and Vince Mulvey (Norton Rose) 
17.1 Introduction
17.2 International
17.2.1 International aspects of oil trading
17.2.2 Special trade terms
17.2.3 Standardisation of terms
17.2.4 International sale of goods
17.2.5 General trade laws
17.2.6 Financial issues
17.2.7 Shipping law
17.2.8 Dispute resolution
17.2.9 Impact of national laws
17.2.10 US and UN Trade Sanctions
17.2.11 Sovereign immunity
17.3 United States
17.3.1 Oil trading in the United States
17.3.2 General commercial law
17.3.3 Commodity trading law
17.3.4 Speciﬁc contracts
17.4 United Kingdom
17.4.1 Oil trading in the United Kingdom
17.4.2 General commercial law
17.4.3 Financial services law
17.4.4 Speciﬁc contracts
17.5 Singapore
17.5.1 Oil trading in Singapore
17.5.2 The Singapore Exchange
Appendix 
17.1 Comparison of the procedures and rules of arbitral
institutions
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 832/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 833/964 ---
17.1 Introduction 
The legal issues relevant to oil trading break down into two fun-damental categories: contractual and regulatory. As Chapter 16 has addressed contractual issues, this chapter will focus on the regulatory aspects of the oil market, although there are some very clear areas of overlap. 
Regulation is primarily concerned with contracts and how 
they are traded, and with the companies who trade them and their behaviour
. But state trading policies, for example tax, 
customs and export regimes, are also expressed in law. Moreover, general laws such as shipping laws, commercial laws or codes and banking laws are also relevant to the oil trading deal. In addi-tion, there are other important laws that can only be ignored at huge risk, such as competition or anti-trust laws – all of which are relevant to the oil market. 
All trading is regulated to a greater or lesser extent by 
states. Before 1970, the international oil industry was domi-nated by major vertically integrated oil companies who either produced, processed and sold their own oil products, or procured large amounts of oil under the long-term contracts. However
, 
the emergence of independent producers and reﬁneries and the events of the seventies led to the development of the spot market. Initially the spot market was only concerned with trading at the margin – rectifying supply and demand imbalances – but by the 1980s the spot contract, or spot price related contracts, had become the dominant form of trading. T
erm con-
tracts became very short (less than a year), and spot contracts for the immediate delivery of speciﬁed cargoes at ﬁxed and ﬂat prices were the norm. But despite the rapid changes, all these contracts were still covered by normal legal regimes of the rele-vant states. 
In the 1980s, however, new forms of oil contracts emerged: 
some to handle physical delivery risks, some to handle price risk management, and some as tax minimisation vehicles. 
And, 
as the range of risk management in oil trading increased, so did the variety of the market participants. In some cases, addi-tional laws were required to regulate the operation of the new markets. 
The current spectrum of oil trading contracts divides 
into two basic categories: those which are primarily con-cerned with physical delivery (“wet contracts”) and those which are primarily concerned with price risk management (“paper contracts”): 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.1/page 1

--- Page 834/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Wet contracts 
•	Long term 
•	Term 
•	Spot 
•	Physical forward 
•	Options on physical oil contracts 
•	Exchanges or swaps of physical oil 
•	Counter trade and barter deals 
Paper contracts 
•	Paper forward 
•	Futures and options 
•	Swaps and swaptions 
•	Various contracts for differences (including bookouts) 
•	Financial instruments including spreads, box trades 
etc. 
Many of the paper contracts are couched as physical delivery con-tracts, including most exchange-traded futures contracts. But they differ from wet contracts in that their prime purpose is price risk management and they are normally settled before delivery
. 
As a result, most of the legal issues concerning oil trading are relevant to both paper and wet markets, although price risk man-agement markets have, on occasion, come under signiﬁcant addi-tional regulatory control by those states in which the markets are primarily located. 
Oil trading occurs at both the domestic and international 
levels. Oil is also traded against a variety of markers; these are deﬁned by either the “type” of crude oil (for example Dubai, Brent, WTI etc.) or their geographical base (North W
est Europe, 
US Gulf, US East Coast, Singapore etc.). 
This chapter will identify the key laws and how they affect 
oil trading. It is, of course, not an exhaustive analysis and is intended only to be a lay guide to the regulatory issues with respect to oil trading and should not be construed as proffering legal advice. 
17.1/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 835/964 ---
17.2 International 
17.2.1 International aspects of oil trading 
International law and practice has a signiﬁcant impact on oil trading and its legal documentation, even though most contracts specify a national law as the governing law of the contract for the sale or carriage of oil. While much of the international law that relates to trade, shipping or ﬁnance is imported into domestic law by national laws, some is not and yet is applicable to interna-tional deals. 
There are also trade terms and practices which have been 
developed by the international mercantile community
, which, 
to a certain extent, have been standardised. Incoterms1 and the 
UCP,2 are examples of such standardisation. In some countries 
Incoterms or the UCP are given statutory force; in others they have been recognised as custom of the trade (and thus are con-sidered to be part of domestic law); while, in still other countries, such as the UK, the terms must be expressly imported into the contract if the parties wish the deﬁnitions to apply ( see Chapter 
16
). 
17.2.2 Special trade terms 
The terms of the contract that will be selected by parties to an international sale of oil will depend on the point at which the responsibility and title to the oil is to be transferred from the seller to the buyer
. This determines the extent of the seller’s 
responsibility with respect to loading, transportation, delivery, insurance, payment of duties and taxes, procurement of permits and licences for export or import and so on. The assumption or otherwise of such responsibilities and their associated costs clearly affects the sale price. 
It is important for any sales contract for oil to make clear 
the meaning of any special trade terms used in the contract. This can be achieved either by expressly deﬁning their meanings in the contract, or by referring to general terms and conditions of sale which already deﬁne it, or by referring to Incoterms. These were ﬁrst published in 1936 and have been revised on a regular basis, the current edition being Incoterms 2000. 
1Incoterms – A standard set of deﬁnitions of trade terms drawn 
up by the International Chamber of Commerce. 
2Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (UCP). 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 1

--- Page 836/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
The terms range from Ex-W orks (Ex-Reﬁnery) which is the 
most favourable export transaction for the seller to DDP which is the most favourable to the buyer. In earlier editions of Incoterms there was the trade term “Free on Rail”. By the time the 1990 edition of Incoterms went to print it was thought that the term FCA would cover this and with Free on Rail not appearing in Incoterms 2000 the matter now seems settled. The most common terms used in oil trading at present are for sea-borne cargoes FOB and CIF and for rail and pipelines either FCA or DDP. 
Incoterms The current Incoterms are: 
• EXW Ex Works 
• FCA Free Carrier 
• FAS Free Alongside Ship 
• FOB Free on Board 
• CFR Cost and Freight 
• CIF Cost, Insurance and Freight 
• CPT Carriage Paid To 
• CIP Carriage and Insurance Paid To 
• DAF Delivered at Frontier 
• DES Delivered Ex Ship 
• DEQ Delivered Ex-Quay 
• DDU Delivered Duty Unpaid 
• DDP Delivered Duty Paid 
It should be noted that Incoterms only cover a limited range of issues and they should not be relied upon to answer all issues with respect to the sale. For example, they do not include any force majeure deﬁnition, destination restrictions, etc. 
FOB In a contract the term fob is followed by a named port (e.g. fob Augusta) or an agreed range of ports (e.g. fob 
ARA). In the basic 
fob oil sale contract the seller must, during the stipulated deliv-ery period, put the oil on board a vessel nominated by the buyer at the agreed port named in the contract. The seller is responsi-ble for all charges and risks up to the time the goods cross the ship’
s rail at which time the property and risk pass to the buyer.3 
3 Caution should be exercised in the US jurisdiction; see com-
mentary in respect of the Uniform Commercial Code. 
17.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 837/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
The buyer must nominate a ship and is responsible for all charges after the goods cross the rail, including stowage, freight, marine insurance, unloading charges, and import duties. 
It should be noted that under English law, in addition to the 
obligations of the seller set out in Incoterms, a fob seller must, under s.32(3) of the UK Sale of Goods 
Act 1979, give the buyer – 
in circumstances in which it is usual to insure – due notice enabling him to insure the oil during sea transit. If the seller fails to do so the oil is deemed to be at the seller’s risk during the sea transit. 
The liabilities of the parties under a fob contract are also 
deﬁned by a speciﬁc trade custom or custom of the port. For example in oil trading a trade usage exists according to which a fob buyer has to give the seller timely notice of loading. 
It should also be noted that in the United States, the term 
fob is no longer solely related to vessels, and under s.2–319(1) of the 
American Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), fob has become 
a general delivery term, (like free delivery at named destination) which, on occasion, can cause some confusion. It has been said that the equivalent of a fob contract, as that term is understood in the UK and the Commonwealth, is “Fob Vessel” in the US.
4 
CIF Under a cif contract the buyer pays a combined price covering the cost of the oil, an insurance policy covering its carriage and the cost of the carriage (i.e. freight cost) to the port/terminal of des-tination. The seller’s obligations are performed by transferring to the buyer
, in return for the price, the documents representing the 
goods: the invoice for the price, the insurance policy and the bill of lading received from the carrier during the contract period. This is considered to be equivalent to the delivery of the goods themselves. 
The seller’s obligations therefore include making all the nec-
essary arrangements for the safe carriage of the oil to a named destination (e.g. cif Hamburg). This includes shipping the goods within the proper time under a reasonable contract of carriage and marine insurance policy (under which the buyer will be entitled to make claims and receive the proceeds of such claims in the event of cargo loss) and then tendering the documents to 
4Schmitthoff ’s Export Trade, The Law and Practice of Interna­
tional Trade; D’Arcy, Murray and Cleave, Sweet & Maxwell 2000, p17 
para 2-006. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 3

--- Page 838/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
the buyer who then in turn becomes obligated to pay the agreed 
price within an agreed time. Once the documents are accepted the title and risk pass to the buyer, and the buyer is then respon
-
sible for any import licences, import duties and subsequent costs of unloading, etc. 
The utility of the cif contract lies not only in the fact that the 
buyer receives the documents and thus the oil with all expenses paid to their destination, but that the buyer may 
, before the oil is 
shipped or while aﬂoat, resell it before it reaches its destination. 
There are several variants on the cif contract, the most 
important in the oil trade is the cif out-turn contract developed in the US. Here, by means of a price adjustment, the buyer only pays for the actual amount of oil delivered, rather than the amount loaded as per bill of lading. Because this is intended only to relate to the determination of price, US courts have ruled that such clauses do not affect the character of the contract, which remains a true cif contract. 17.2.3 Standardisation of terms 
The mandate of the United Nations Commission on International T
rade Law (UNCITRAL) is the uniﬁcation and harmonisation of 
international trade law. To date a number of major pieces of work have been completed including: 
1.	The Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) 1980 , (
see Section 17.2.4 ). 
2.	The Convention on the Limitation Period in the Inter­national Sale of Goods 1974. This establishes a limi-
tation period of generally four years and attempts to harmonise the common law procedural approach and the civil law substantive approach to the issue of ter-mination of rights of action. A 1980 Protocol aligned the provisions of the Convention with those of the 1980 Convention. 
3.	The Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea 1978 (usually known as the “Hamburg Rules”) which regu-late international bills of lading ( see Section 17.2.7 ). 
4.	The Convention on the International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes 1988 (
see Section 
17.2.6 ). 
5.	The United Nations Convention on Independent and Stand-by Letters of Credit, 1995.
5 
5 This convention is currently only in force in ﬁve countries. 
17.2/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 839/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
UNCITRAL has also adopted Arbitration Rules 1976 ( see Section 
17.2.8 ). Additionally, a number of “Model Laws”, for instance, the 
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Credit Transfers (1992), have been produced which aim to provide a framework to assist states with the drafting and formulation of their own national legislation in a number of key areas. 17.2.4 International sale of goods 
With the notable exception of the UK, many of the major oil trading countries – including the United States and Russia – are parties to the UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods (CISG) 1980. This Convention relates only to inter­
national sales of goods and under 
Article 1 applies automatically 
to those contracts where the places of business of the parties are in different States and either (a) both States are Contracting States or (b) only one State is a Contracting State and private international law choice of law rules would lead to the applica-tion of the law of the Contracting State. 
If the parties to an international contract wish to prevent 
the application of the Convention then under 
Article 6 they can 
expressly opt out of its application ( see Chapter 16 ). Although it 
is clear that the parties may “opt out” of the Convention, care must be used in drafting a statement of exclusion as some author-ities do not believe an implicit exclusion would be recognised by a court. Thus an exclusion clause should read something to the effect that: 
“this contract shall not be governed by the CISG 1980, but shall be governed by XXXXX law”. 
Articles 7–13 of the CISG deal with general principles and the interpretation of the CISG and the contract, including party conduct and trade usage (Article 9). Articles 14–24 deal with issues connected with formation of contract: what constitutes a contract, when it is formed, etc. Under the CISG there is no requirement of “consideration” for contract formation, unlike English law: merely that there be an offer and an acceptance of that offer. The CISG approach to acceptance is closer to the US approach – which holds that there must be no difference in mate­
rial terms – than the English approach – which requires exact 
mirror acceptance. But on the question of when the contract is formed, CISG Article 18 states that the acceptance becomes effec-tive when it is received by the offeror – like English law – and differs from the US “mailbox rule” – which states that the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 5

--- Page 840/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
contract acceptance is effective from the time of dispatch of the 
acceptance. 
Part III of CISG deals with the obligations of buyer and 
seller and the passing of risk. Interestingly, the CISG has a limited deﬁnition of delivery which only relates to transfer of pos-session and control. But this Part of the CISG also has some signiﬁcant provisions, which are not necessarily part of US or English law
. For example, under Article 41, the seller is obliged 
to deliver goods not only free from any encumbrance to their title but also free from any third party claim, i.e. “quiet possession of the goods”. While, on other occasions, it leaves some issues unre-solved. It is essential if the Convention is to apply that the parties disapply , as they may under 
Article 6, any provision which is not 
appropriate . 
Part V contains provisions on anticipatory breach, damages 
and exemptions and avoidance of contract. 
Many scholars are impressed with the ﬂexibility of the Con-
vention, such as its provisions relating to time limitations on giving notice in a timely manner (Articles 39 and 44). Others are concerned about its provisions which have been drafted as a com-promise between legal systems. Whether or not a trader should allow the CISG to apply to an oil sales contract is a matter which should be discussed with his legal advisor
. The easiest – but 
perhaps not optimal – approach is to choose as the governing law the law which the parties or the market normally use or are most familiar with. 17.2.5 General trade laws 
European Union In the European Union (EU) the provisions of the EC Treaty – and all the law which has been promulgated as a result – have had a signiﬁcant impact on oil trading in EU member states. The EU is – among other things – a customs union and goods circu-late freely between member states without quantitative or qual-itative restrictions and without customs formalities or duties or charges having equivalent effect. The EU also establishes com-mon customs tariffs vis-a-vis third states, as well as a common 
value added tax system. Frequently oil contracts specify EU duty paid. 
The competition law provisions, Articles 81 & 82 of the 
T
reaty, which prohibit certain anti-competitive or monopolistic 
behaviour, have particular importance to oil trading, oil futures exchanges – which periodically seek exemption from their appli-
17.2/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 841/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
cation – and oil companies’ behaviour. It is worth noting that EU competition law – like US anti-trust law – has extra-territorial effect. Thus traders who ignore the reach of Articles 81 and 82 may experience severe consequences in the form of ﬁnes up to 10 per cent of gross world turnover – although this is perhaps not as severe as the felony criminal sanctions and private treble damages actions found in the US. However, it is important to note that these Articles also render the offending contracts null and void. 
EU legislation also covers environmental issues, specifying, 
for example, acceptable levels of sulphur
, which in turn affects 
quality speciﬁcations in oil trading contracts. World Trade Organisation The World Trade Organisation (“WTO”) was established in 1995. It is the successor to the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(“GATT”) which was an institution which grew out of the agree-ment of the same name. The WTO is an international body (having approximately 140 states as members accounting for over 90% of world trade) which deals with the rules of trade between nations. 
At its heart are the WTO Agreements covering trade in 
goods, services and intellectual property. GATT, the agreement, has been amended and incorporated into the WTO Agreements and is the principal agreement dealing with trade in goods. The WTO, like its predecessor, aims to liberalise trade among states by reducing trade barriers such as tariffs, import quotas and other non-tariff barriers from international trade. WTO members agree to be bound by the WTO Agreements (Article II (2) of the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organisation). 
Article 1 of GATT requires each party to accord Most 
Favoured Nation (MFN) status to all the other GA
TT partici-
pants. MFN status under GATT means that a participant will not extend to any other country trade arrangements which are more favourable than those available to the other participants – although free trade areas are permitted. GA
TT also incorporates 
the practice of according national treatment to imported goods (Article III). Thus export goods of one participant are generally to be treated in no less favourable a way than the domestic products under its laws and regulations concerning sale, resale, purchase, transportation and use. 
Article V of GATT creates a right of transit for goods, 
although it does not include pipeline transit. GA
TT also prohibits 
any use of quantitative restrictions, although it does allow non-discriminatory duties, taxes and other charges (Article XI) but 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 7

--- Page 842/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
their use is controlled (Articles X and XXVIII). It speciﬁcally pro -
hibits quotas, import or export licences and other such measures. Under GATT negotiated tariff rates (tariff schedules) are agreed and are binding. 
GATT does allow safety valves for states to protect domestic 
markets in speciﬁc circumstances, for example, those dealing with anti-dumping measures and countervailing duties. 
National restrictions on the import or export of oil could 
breach GA 
TT in the following circumstances: 
•	an import ban or quota (clearly not in line with Article XI unless an emergency); or 
•	a prohibition on importation of a good that fails to meet standards (e.g. safety or environmental). There is a 1979 Standards Code which sets the guidelines for how such requirements should be implemented; or 
•	a customs rule that under GATT would not be permitted. 
Importantly, controls on exports (whether bans, quotas, or taxes) are not the subject of the provisions of GA
TT. Thus restrictions 
on exporting domestically produced oil, as for example, in the United States, are not covered by GATT provisions. 
Unfortunately GATT and other WTO Agreements are 
multilateral agreements between member states only 
, and 
individuals and companies have no directly effective rights by which they can bring action in a dispute resolution forum. They must therefore approach the competent Ministry in their country and request that it take up their case and raise a complaint in accordance with the rules of dispute settlement. For WTO Agree-ments a new set of rules have superseded the previous dispute settlement rules used under GA
TT. These rules known as the 
Understanding on Rules and Procedures for the Settlement of Disputes are said to provide a more structured process with more clearly deﬁned stages in the procedure than the rules under GATT provided. An example of how the WTO and its dispute res-olution procedure can have importance in the oil trading busi-ness can be seen in the case that Venezuela brought before the WTO Dispute Settlement Body against the United States on 23 January 1995.
6 
6 World Trade Organisation Dispute Settlement Reports 1996 vol 
1 (2000). 
17.2/page 8	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 843/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Energy Charter Treaty The Energy Charter Treaty was signed in Lisbon on 17 Decem-ber 1994, and came into force on 16 April 1998. Though it has not been ratiﬁed by the United States nor Canada (both of which were signatories to a document signed in the Hague on 17 December 1991 which was the precursor to the T
reaty) it is 
nonetheless an important agreement that will have signiﬁcant long-term implications for the trading of oil. This is partly because many of the ratifying states are from the former com-munist bloc – as well as all the states of the European Union and other trading states such as Japan. The T
reaty is outside the 
WTO Agreements and seeks to promote co-operation in the energy sector, to open markets and to protect investment. 
Many of its articles are aimed at the progressive opening 
of energy markets and the promotion of competition. 
Article 7 
addresses the issue of transit and speciﬁcally transit through the transit state’s pipeline system. Although Article 7 stops short of granting a right of transit it comes very close to it and ensures that transit oil should not be discriminated against in favour of domestic oil. The potential importance of the access to pipeline systems is clear. However, it should be noted that – while this is an international treaty between states – there is also a special provision allowing entities – as well as contracting parties – to resolve disputes under a special procedure set out in Article 7(6) and (7). 17.2.6 Financial issues 
Although a simple contract for the sale of oil can be carried out in a straightforward way with the seller delivering the oil and the buyer paying the price, it is not always possible to do this in oil trading. Frequently
, the buyers and sellers are in different 
countries, there is often an independent carrier, and there is a time delay between the seller loading the oil and the buyer receiv-ing it. This raises many issues, including who wishes to tie up money in oil in transit. 
For these reasons, a sophisticated system of credit has 
evolved to deal with international sales that is available through the banks, who organise the payment and assist in compliance with any currency or exchange control regulations. 
Bills of exchange The UK Bills of Exchange Act 1882, which codiﬁed the law gov-erning bills of exchange, deﬁned (s.3) a bill of exchange as 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 9

--- Page 844/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
“an unconditional order in writing addressed by one person to 
another, signed by the person giving it, requiring the person to whom it is addressed to pay on demand or at a ﬁxed or deter
-
minable future time a sum of money to or to the order of a speci-ﬁed person or to bearer”. 
Like a cheque, a bill of exchange is a form of negotiable 
instrument. It is a document which acts as a substitute for money and is evidence of the right of the person legally entitled to pos-session of it (the holder) to claim a particular sum of money (often in speciﬁed circumstances). 
Bills of exchange have some characteristics worth noting: •	the holder may sue on it in his name; 
•	the holder may transfer to a subsequent holder, either 
by delivery if it is payable to bearer or by endorsement and delivery; 
•	no notice of assignment is required; 
•	the value of them lies in the fact that by accepting a bill drawn down on him by the seller for the amount of the price, the buyer effectively gives the seller a doc-ument for which the seller can obtain immediate value; and 
•	 often bills of exchange are “claused”, which means it 
contains a number of additional provisions. 
The purpose of a documentary bill is mainly to ensure that the buyer does not receive the bill of lading (and therewith the right to dispose of the goods) until the buyer has ﬁrst accepted or paid the attached bill of exchange according to the arrangement set out between the parties. 
Bills of exchange are used frequently in letters of credit 
arrangements. In order to obtain payment under a letter of credit the seller of the oil must attach what is called a “draft”, or bill of exchange, to the documents required which the banks involved have agreed to honour if accompanied by a complete set of docu-ments. This bill of exchange, or “draft”, is written by the seller and drawn on the buyer or the buyer
’s bank for the amount of 
the contract price. The ﬂow of goods, drafts and documents in a typical international oil sale is illustrated in Fig. 17.1. 
The UN Convention on International Bills of Exchange and 
International Promissory Notes 1988 is an attempt to reconcile the two differing approaches to bills of exchange. It will come into force one year after there are ten parties to it and will create clear instruments and rules for international bills of exchange. Cur-rently, however, only Guinea, Honduras and Mexico have acceded to the Convention. 
17.2/page 10	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 845/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Documentary letters of credit In oil trading, due to the practicalities of the trade, the common method of payment (if not by open account) is by letter of credit. The ICC’
s “Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary 
Credits” (UCP) has been very widely used, although it only has force when it is expressly adopted by the parties. 
The current edition is UCP 500 of 1993. It covers documen-
tary credits, including standby credits. It deﬁnes documentary credit to mean “any arrangement however named or described, whereby a bank (the ‘Issuing Bank’) acting at the request and the instructions of a customer (the ‘Applicant’) or on its own behalf: 
i.	is to make a payment to or to the order of a third party (the ‘Beneﬁciary’), or is to accept and pay bills of exchange (‘Draft(s)’) drawn by the Beneﬁciary
, or 
ii.	authorises another bank to effect such payment, or to accept and pay such bills of exchange (Draft(s)), or 
iii. authorises another bank to negotiate against stipu-lated documents, provided that the terms and condi-tions of the credit are complied with.” 
The use and type of letter of credit will be speciﬁed in the oil sales contract. The buyer will then instruct his bank to open a credit for the seller
. Normally the issuing bank will arrange through a 
corresponding bank in the seller’s country to do this. Once the seller presents the documents speciﬁed in the sale contract to the corresponding bank he is entitled to payment. 
There are several types of letters of credit which are brieﬂy 
described below: 
•	Revocable and irrevocable A 
revocable letter of credit is one which can be can-
celled or modiﬁed at any time prior to it being drawn on by the seller
. Unless the contract stipulates to the 
contrary no notice of revocation is necessary. Not sur-prisingly therefore this form is not used in oil trading. Rather an irrevocable letter of credit, which cannot be thus cancelled or modiﬁed, is commonly used. 
•	Conﬁrmed or unconﬁrmed letters of credit A 
credit is conﬁrmed when the correspondent bank 
gives the seller its own undertaking to pay him on presentation of the required documents. Clearly it is in the seller’s interest where possible to have a con-ﬁrmed letter of credit, although the other side to this is that the buyer has to be prepared to meet the cost. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.2/page 11

--- Page 846/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Where the corresponding bank does not give such an 
undertaking the letter of credit is unconﬁrmed. 
•	Revolving letters of credit When the buyer and seller have regular trading it is common to open what is termed a revolving letter of credit. Here a maximum amount of credit is ﬁxed from which the seller can draw down, at the same time as the buyer replenishes it, usually by a standing order
. 
The bank’s role Under a documentary letter of credit the seller is paid against the presentation to the bank of the documents required by the contract for sale and speciﬁed in the buyer
’s instructions to the 
issuing bank. It should be noted (Article 3) that the UCP expressly states that letters of credit “by their nature, are sepa-rate transactions from the sales or other contracts on which they may be based and banks are in no way concerned with or bound by such contract(s), even if any reference whatsoever to such con-tract(s) is included in the credit”. 
In Article 4 of UCP it states clearly that in credit operations 
all parties concerned deal in documents and not with goods. Thus the banks are solely concerned with receiving documents that exactly comply with the requirements of the letter of credit. They are not concerned with commercial purposes and must accept or reject promptly
. They are not concerned with custom/trade prac-
tice and must only examine documents with reasonable care on the face of the documents. 
Thus a bank receiving non-conforming documents should 
reject them no matter how minor the discrepancy 
. An issuing 
bank which accepts unsatisfactory documents is in fact in breach of its contract with the buyer and, similarly, a corresponding bank which does so will not be entitled to payment by the issuing bank. However, even where the documents are forged a bank is not nec-essarily in breach of its obligations when it makes payment upon their presentation as it will depend on the facts whether the bank was negligent in accepting them. This view of the bank’
s role and 
the requirements for the documents are often described as the twin fundamental principles of letters of credit: the autonomy of the credit (Articles 3 and 4) and the doctrine of strict perform-ance (Articles 13 and 14). Documents The documents that may be required for presentation include the following: 
17.2/page 12	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 847/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
CARRIER BUYER 
CARRIER SELLER’S 
* there may be a number of specified documents of which the bill of lading will be one Draft Bill ofContract BUYER’S 
BANK 
SELLER 
BANK Bill of lading* 
G
oods 
Goods 
Bill of lading* Goods Bill of lading* 
Draft 
Payment 
Payment 
Bill of lading* lading* Draft Payment Promise to 
deliver 
documents Promise 
to pay 
purchase 
price 
Figure 17.1 Goods and documents in an international oil sale 
•	commercial invoices; 
•	insurance policy, in negotiable form, in the currency of 
the credit; 
•	bills of lading; 
•	certiﬁcate of origin ( note: be very careful with these); 
•	certiﬁcate of quantity; and 
•	certiﬁcate of quality. 
Opening credit Normally the oil sales contract will specify when to open the credit. The buyer has an absolute duty to open the letter of credit within the time speciﬁed by the contract. The credit is opened in accordance with instructions given by the buyer to the issuing bank which form the basis of the contract between them. 
Figure 17.1 illustrates the links in the classic international 
documentary sale. 
The steps are the following: (1) Buyer and seller agree in oil sales contract that 
payment shall be by letter of credit. 
(2) Buyer instructs issuing bank to open letter of credit in 
favour of the seller (the beneﬁciary) on terms speciﬁed by the buyer in his instructions to the issuing bank, probably including payment against presentation of speciﬁed documents. 
(3) The issuing bank arranges with a bank in the seller’s location (the advising bank) to advise the seller of the 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.2/page 13

--- Page 848/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
credit (it may be conﬁrmed) and to pay the seller ’s 
draft against delivery of the required documents by the seller. 
(4) The advising bank informs the seller that it will pay his draft upon presentation with the required documents. 
(5) On receipt of the goods for carriage the carrier gives the seller the bill of lading. 
(6) The seller arranges all other documents required and together with them submits his draft to the advising bank. 
(7) The advising bank makes payment and sends the doc-uments to the issuing bank and receives payment from the issuing bank. 
(8) The issuing bank gives the draft (paid) and all docu-ments to the buyer and receives payment. 
(9) The buyer presents the bill of lading to the carrier and receives the goods. 
Assignment A letter of credit is not a negotiable instrument. It can be expressly made transferable to a second but not to a third or further beneﬁciary under 
Article 48 of UCP. 
The majority of letter of credit disputes in oil trading revolve 
around the following issues: 
•	non-compliance with the terms of the credit, especially with non-conformity of the documents; 
•	justiﬁed or unjustiﬁed bank refusal to perform its obligations; 
•	cases of fraud in the transaction; and 
•	cases where there is later non-conformity of the goods. 
17.2.7 Shipping law 
Bills of lading There are two basic types of contract of carriage of goods by sea: those contained in “charterparties”, and those evidenced by bills of lading. 
A charterparty is a contract between the ship owner 
and a party who wishes to use the ship to carry his cargo, “the charterer”. Under the contract the charterer obtains the use of the vessel for a voyage (voyage charterparty) or for a stipulated time period (time charterparty). Most of the major oil companies 
17.2/page 14	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 849/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
and tanker owners have standard charterparties for both voyage and time. 
Charterparties are normally governed by general national 
laws and the principle of freedom of contract applies to them. If the charterer loads the cargo on to the chartered vessel he will normally be issued with a bill of lading, but it should be noted that the bill of lading does not supersede the charterparty between the ship owner and the charterer
. If the bill of lading is 
then endorsed to a third party, the relations between the ship owner and the third party are based on the bill of lading and not the charterparty. 
Bills of lading are generally governed by speciﬁc national 
laws that usually fully or partially incorporate the international conventions relating to bills of lading, in particular the Hague– V
isby Rules which are discussed brieﬂy below ( see also Chapter 
16). 
Bills of lading are normally issued in sets: each bill being 
valid until one of them is presented. The bill of lading has three important functions: it is evidence of the contract of carriage, a receipt for the goods and a document of title to the goods. 
If the goods are not received in good order and condition 
the carrier or his agent may note this on the bill of lading, thus making it a “claused”, rather than the “clean”, bill normally required in oil trading. 
In oil trading, the bill of lading is also used as a document 
of title as it represents the oil that has been bought and it can therefore be bought, sold or pledged as if it were the goods. It is not however a negotiable instrument and therefore the buyer can obtain only as good title as the transferor
. Thus the transfer of a 
bill of lading will transfer the property in the oil, for instance while the goods are in transit between Rotterdam and New York, as long as the intention of the parties is that property should pass. 
The issues of the passage of title and risk with respect to 
bills of lading have given rise to a number of major oil cases. In particular
, a number of problems have arisen because of the 
mechanics of oil trading: 
•	problems relating to the passage of property, particu-larly because the oil is often shipped on large bulk tankers where it is unascertained cargo. Should any problem with respect to loss, contamination or the like occur there are major problems in the passage of property in unascertained cargoes under numerous national laws. For a long time this was the case under 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.2/page 15

--- Page 850/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
s.16 of the UK Sale of Goods Act 1979 until it was 
amended by s.20A of the Sale of Goods (Amendment) Act 1995; and 
•	problems because the bill of lading arrives after the oil has been discharged. Some companies put all the bills on board the vessel for delivery on arrival. This prac-tice was challenged, but upheld by a UK court. Another oil trade practice to get around such problems is for the seller to issue a letter of indemnity to the buyer
. 
Although traders and banks have voiced concern on their use, they appear to serve a useful and indeed essential role in ensuring that oil trading can function smoothly.
7 
Hague–Visby rules The Hague Rules of 1924 (The Convention for the Uniﬁcation of Certain Rules of Law relating to Bills of Lading 1924) which set out a uniform international regime to govern the respective rights and obligations of cargo-owners and carriers were rela-tively widely subscribed to by the major shipping nations. The Rules deﬁned the basic obligations of the carrier and prescribe the maximum protection that can be derived from inserting exception and limitation clauses in the contract of carriage, but they did not create a comprehensive and self-sufﬁcient code and were seen as offering a very limited protection to cargo owners. As a result, the Rules were revised and re-drafted in 1968 with one important amendment (Article 8) being that ship owners or cargo owners cannot contract out of the Rules. These 1968 Rules, known as Hague–V
isby Rules, have however, been acceded to by 
fewer states. 
The rules of 1924 and 1968 have been incorporated into some 
major legal systems, for example: the Hague–V
isby Rules were 
fully incorporated into English law by the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1971; the Hague Rules are part of US law in the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1936; and the Merchant Shipping Code of the USSR 1968 (as amended) – which still applies to the Russian Federation – adopted many of the provisions of the Rules without wholesale incorporation. 
7 A useful article on the problems and issues arising from their 
widespread use can be found in [1990] 10 OGLTR 353. 
17.2/page 16	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 851/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Hamburg Rules The UN Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea 1978 (the Hamburg Rules) came into force in 1992. 
Although important 
maritime States such as the UK have not yet become a party to the Convention – nor apparently are likely to do so in the near future – there is at least one major oil producing and trading country (Nigeria) which has. 
The Hamburg Rules
8 are founded on the principle (enunci-
ated in Article 5) that the carrier is liable unless he can prove that he was neither at fault nor negligent. In doing so they removed the necessity to elaborate in detail the carrier
’s duties 
and immunities, as were done in Article III and IV of the Hague Rules. They also introduced some important alterations to the Hague–Visby Rules, including the following: 
•	the extension of scope beyond bills of lading to all con-tracts of carriage by sea except charterparties; 
•	the extension of the period of liability of the carrier to the whole period during which the goods are in his charge; 
•	the abolition of the exclusion of limitation of the carrier
’s liability in case of error of navigation; 
•	the increase of the maximum levels of liability of the carrier and the ﬁxing of them by reference to the special drawing rights of the IMF; and 
•	the making of a new distinction between the contrac-tual carrier and the actual carrier. The contractual carrier is liable for the entire carriage and for the acts and omissions of the actual carrier
, although the actual 
carrier is still liable for his own part of the carriage. Thus both, in principle, are liable to the shipper jointly and severally. 
Marine insurance While oil is being transported from the seller to the buyer it will be at risk and this risk is normally covered by insurance. There is no speciﬁc international law governing marine insurance. It is just an insurance contract and can, in its modern form, cover not only the sea transit but any other carriage associated with sea 
8An overview of the Hamburg Rules can be found in [1992] 3 
OGLTR 67. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.2/page 17

--- Page 852/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
travel. It is therefore governed by domestic laws and, in the UK, 
by the Marine Insurance Act 1906. This contains as its First Schedule the Lloyd’s Ship and Goods Policy, which in 1982 was replaced by the Lloyd’s Marine Insurance Policy and ﬁve Insti
-
tute Cargo clauses. The key clauses are A, B and C and for oil trading the most important is the Bulk Oil Clause.
9 
With respect to liability for pollution from ship it is common 
in oil sales contracts to require that all vessels provided or arranged for making/taking delivery of the oil should be owned or chartered by a member of the International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation Ltd (ITOPF), and that the vessel carries on board a certiﬁcate of insurance as described in the 1992 Civil Liability Convention for Oil Pollution Damage ( see Chapter 16 ). 
17.2.8 Dispute resolution 
Arbitration rules Parties to oil sales contracts frequently agree to submit their dis-putes to various forms of dispute resolution. Technical disputes are usually put to the decision of an independent expert, while contractual disputes are often settled using venues and methods of resolving disputes different from the courts of the country whose law is the governing law of the contract. The most common of these is international arbitration. Litigation is often more expensive, takes longer than arbitration and does not have the advantage of privacy
. 
The venues for international arbitration include Geneva, 
Stockholm, New 
York, London and Paris ( see Appendix 17.1 ). 
These arbitrations are conducted according to rules of procedure chosen by the parties to the contract. For example, with Russian oil sales contracts the chosen venue is often Sweden with Stockholm rules (the Rules of the Institute of Arbitration of the Stockholm Chamber Of Commerce). There are also international arbitration rules such as those drafted by UNCITRAL which are not linked to any national or international arbitration venue and the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce whose Court of Arbitration is in Paris. 
Each set of rules and venue has its perceived advantages and 
disadvantages. For example, Sweden – which has easily under-
9 A very useful study on the Lloyd’s policy and the clauses can be 
found in [1985] JBL 228. 
17.2/page 18 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 853/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
stood rules, a good track record, is relatively quick and not too expensive – is seen as a neutral venue by the states of the former Soviet Union. The ICC, whose present Rules came into force on 1 January 1998, is seen as excellent in quality, but expensive and time consuming. The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are seen as a very fair and good set of rules especially for disputes between parties from various legal systems, but again arbitration under these rules is seen as lengthy and potentially expensive. Enforcement It is obviously important to the successful party to arbitration or court proceedings to be able to realise the award the tribunal or court makes. In some cases where the assets of the other party are not in the jurisdiction of the awarding body it may be difﬁ-cult to realise the award. Arbitral awards Most countries are parties to the 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign 
Arbitral Awards. 
Thus, in applying this Convention, most states will recognise an international arbitral award (in most circumstances). Court judgements Unlike the 1958 Convention there is almost no universal recog-nition of other countries’ national court decisions. However, some European states do recognise the judgements of the courts of other parties to the 1968 Brussels Convention on Jurisdiction and Enforcement in Civil and Commercial Matters and the parallel EFT
A Convention. It is always worth checking whether the states 
involved fall within these conventions. 17.2.9 Impact of national laws 
There are also some laws that may affect the behaviour of the companies of a particular State, even though oil trading is not being carried out in the State in question. These include such laws as the US’
s Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) 1977 and 
the UK’s Protection of Trading Interests Act (PTIA) 1980. 
The FCPA makes it criminally unlawful for any US company 
to make use of any means of interstate commerce “corruptly in furtherance . 
. . of the giving anything of value t o... any foreign 
ofﬁcial . . . or any foreign political party for purposes of . . . inﬂu-
encing . . . or inducing . . . [action] . . . to assis t...i n obtaining or 
retaining business”. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 19

--- Page 854/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
The PTIA allows, among other things, the UK government 
to require UK businesses to conform to directions of the UK gov -
ernment prohibiting them from complying with measures of other States which regulate or control international trade and which damage or threaten to damage the trading interests of the UK. 17.2.10 US and UN trade sanctions 
Since the mid-1980s measures have been taken by the interna-tional community and, more notably, the US to impose restric-tions on a number of commercial activities being carried out with or by certain states. These states are seen by those taking such measures as recalcitrant and as usually having acted as sponsors of state terrorism. The actions taken include the introduction of US legislation and the passing of United Nations Security Council resolutions providing for sanctions which aim to prevent, or at least restrict, companies from any country from being involved in transacting trade with these states. W
ith three of the 
countries being targeted by these sanctions holding major oil and gas reserves – Libya, Iran and Iraq – the issues arising are of considerable concern to the oil trade business. 
On 3 August 2001 the US Congress renewed for a second 5 
year term the Iran–Libya Sanctions 
Act 1996 (ILSA).10 Amongst 
other things, this Act places US sanctions on foreign companies that invest more than US$20 million annually in Iran or Libya. Executive Orders, issued by President Clinton in 1995, already prohibit any US company from either investing in Iran or pur-chasing any Iranian oil. There are arguments for and against the cost and effectiveness of the 
Act but for non-US companies the 
peril of acting contrary to its provisions has been summed up thus: “All we are doing is telling foreign companies that are willing to deal with Iran that they may have to pay a price when it comes to their dealings with [the US]”.
11 
Following the invasion of Kuwait in 1990 the United Nations 
Security Council passed Resolution 661 requiring all member states of the UN to prevent, amongst other things, the import of all commodities originating in Iraq and to prevent their 
10The renewing legislation being the ILSA (Iran–Libya Sanctions) 
Extension Act of 2001. 
11 The Chairman of the Subcommittee, Hon. Benjamin A. Gilman, 
speaking before the House of Representatives, Subcommittee on the Middle East and South Asia, Committee on International Relations, One Hundred and Seventh Congress on 9 May 2001. 
17.2/page 20 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 855/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
nationals from exporting all commodities to Iraq other than limited medical products and, in humanitarian cases, foodstuffs. In 1995 UN Security Council Resolution 986 was passed permit-ting limited amounts of Iraqi oil exports in exchange for human-itarian aid; the so-called Oil-for-Food programme. There have been temporal extensions to Resolutions 986 as well as an easing of its terms since 1995. However
, oil traders need to be careful to 
ensure they comply with the Resolution. The US has shown it is determined to police its terms as was demonstrated in April 2000 when the US Navy intercepted a Russian tanker in the Gulf which was found to be carrying a gasoil cargo, 20% of which was of Iraqi origin. 
The implications for oil companies of these types of sanctions 
can be profound. Cargoes can be conﬁscated and, under the US legislation, ﬁnancial pressures can be brought to bear on those who fail to operate within their parameters. W
ith the new Bush 
administration signalling its intent to take a tough stand with those countries it eyes with suspicion, oil traders would be well advised to exercise caution when engaging even in an indirect way with any state against which sanctions have been imposed. 
17.2.11 Sovereign immunity 
Normally a foreign sovereign – the State including the govern-ment – is immune from suit in the national courts of other States. However
, this doctrine could cause some problems where 
immunity is claimed by state-owned banks or state-owned oil companies. 
Thus a number of States, in particular the US and the UK, 
have introduced State Immunity 
Acts which – while restating the 
general principle – create exceptions in cases where, inter alia , 
commercial transactions are entered into by the State, obliga-tions of the State which by virtue of a contract fall to be per-formed wholly or partly in the legislating State, and matters relating to ships and cargoes used for commercial purposes such as oil (see s.3 of the UK State Immunity 
Act 1978). 
The general impact of these laws is that the State agency/ 
company/bank, unless acting in a “public” capacity
, is put in the 
same position as a private legal entity. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.2/page 21

--- Page 856/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 857/964 ---
17.3 United States 
17.3.1 Oil trading in the United States 
As with all jurisdictions, United States law affects all contracts for the sale or purchase of oil that are made in the US or that are governed by US law
. The relevant legislation includes general 
commercial laws relating to contracts and corporate behaviour as well as more speciﬁc laws relating to exports and imports, international trading, and forward, futures, options and swap contracts. 
In the US, futures and options contracts fall under the scope 
of the Commodity Exchange 
Act (CEA) and are regulated by 
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) ( see Section 
17.3.3 ), while forward delivery and swap contracts appear to be 
excluded (at least in certain speciﬁed circumstances). The US approach to the regulation of oil trading activities is therefore dif-ferent from that in the UK ( see Section 17.4 ). 
17.3.2 General commercial law 
Uniform Commercial Code The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is in effect in each State in the US and forms the legal basis of any oil trading contract under US law
. The UCC is a codiﬁcation of the law not only on 
the sale of goods but also on commercial paper, documents of title, negotiable instruments, and in fact touches almost all commer-cial transactions. 
However, since the US is a party to the UN Convention on 
the International Sale of Goods 1980 (CISG), the US oil trader should not assume that the UCC is automatically applicable to his contracts – even if it is expressly governed by a US state’
s 
law – in cases where the places of business of both parties to the contract are in countries that are parties to the CISG. 
It is important for the US oil trader to note that there are 
some important differences between the way the UCC and the CISG handle legal issues connected with the sale of goods. Some of these differences are: 
•	Formation of contract: consideration Under common law offer
, acceptance and consideration 
are required for contract formation and will also be required under the UCC unless the requirement is 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.3/page 1

--- Page 858/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
modiﬁed. Under the CISG there is no consideration 
requirement: offer and acceptance alone are necessary and sufﬁcient. (Note however, that under the UCC, in respect of consideration, there are statutory modiﬁca
-
tions to the common law position. In these cases, for example, under §2-205 (a time limit is applied) and §2-209 (modifying agreements), there is less divergence between the UCC and the CISG.) 
•	Formation of contract: effective time Under the UCC the contract is formed when the acceptance has been dispatched (the “mailbox rule”), while under the CISG (Articles 18/22 and 23) the con-tract is formed when and where the acceptance reaches the offeror
. 
•	Revocation The rules on revocation of offer differ
. The UCC is more 
stringent. This could catch out a US buyer. 
•	Remedies T
o a practitioner familiar to remedies under the UCC, 
the CISG’s remedies will seem slightly foreign, but would be considered quite acceptable except for that relating to price reduction. 
Anti-trust legislation The basic anti-trust statute is the Sherman Act 1890 (as amended). It is both broad and comprehensive in its scope. It creates criminal offences which are punishable by ﬁnes and imprisonment and it can also be enforced by civil actions by the government or by private triple damages actions. 
Section 1 declares illegal and a felony “every contract, com-
bination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce amongst several states or with foreign nations 
. . .”. Section 2 states that every person who shall 
monopolise, or attempt to monopolise any part of trade or com-merce among several states or with foreign nations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanour
. 
The breadth of these prescriptions means the courts in the 
US have over the years determined, to a greater or lesser extent what constitutes restraint of trade or monopolisation. The Sherman 
Act has been supplemented by a number of subsequent 
laws. The Federal Trade Commission Act 1914 set up the watch-dog agency, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to implement the 
Act, and section 5 of this Act contained the general prohibi-
tion of “unfair methods of competition in commerce”. 
17.3/page 2	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 859/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
The Clayton Act 1914 is another very important law which 
declares illegal certain speciﬁed business practices where their “. . . effect may be to substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly”. The main practices with which the Act is con-cerned are: price discrimination (and elaborated by the Robinson Patman 
Act 1936), exclusive dealing contracts, and the acquisi-
tion of competing companies. 
Such practices do not constitute criminal offences but can be 
enforced by cease and desist orders by the FTC. Unlike EU law there is no possibility to apply to the Commission to be exempted (at least in certain circumstances) from the application of US anti-trust law
, although the courts have rather ﬁnely developed 
what is called a “rule of reason” for some of the prohibitions, which in some ways moderates the application of the law to some situations. Enforcement of these laws can vary widely from administration to administration. 
Like EU competition law, US anti-trust law has been held 
to have extra-territorial effect and therefore can impact signiﬁ-cantly on foreign trading. The Transnor case,
12 for example, 
involved an oil trader taking a triple damages action in a New York District court against ﬁve oil majors with respect to their trading of 15-day Brent outside the USA. Thus, traders should always be cautious with respect to anti-trust issues. Companies should have compliance guidelines and traders should be careful what they talk about and arrange between themselves and should document such arrangements appropriately in accordance with the guidelines. Sovereign Immunity Act The doctrine of sovereign immunity has its origins in interna-tional law. Basically the doctrine provides that a party cannot sue a sovereign (or an entity with sovereign attributes) unless it consents. The doctrine may be relevant any time a government trades, even through trading organisations or enterprises. 
When the circumstances for its application occur, a court 
relinquishes jurisdiction over the state. In the US the nature, form and procedures relating to the defence of sovereign immu-nity are stated in the Sovereign Immunity Act (SIA) 1976. 
Over the years the concept of absolute immunity has been 
watered down, particularly as states have increasingly entered into ordinary trading transactions. It came to be considered 
12see [1990] 6 OGLTR 151. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.3/page 3

--- Page 860/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
unacceptable that a state could repudiate a deal and avoid its 
contractual obligations merely on the basis of its governmental status. On occasions it was very difﬁcult for the courts to make the distinction between trading and governmental activities. The SIA was an attempt to set objective legal – rather than political 
– guidelines and procedures.
Who is a foreign state under US law? According to 28 USC13 
§1603(a) a foreign state includes “a political division of the state or an agency or instrumentality of the state”. In turn under §1603(b) an “agency or instrumentality of the state is an entity which is a separate legal person, corporate or otherwise and which is an organ of the state or political subdivision thereof, or whose majority of shares or other ownership interest is owned by a foreign state or political subdivision thereof . . .”. Thus a corpo -
ration wholly owned by the state can be for the doctrine’s purpose a foreign state. In oil trading where state oil companies trade in the international markets this doctrine has clear relevance. 
A central feature of the SIA is its speciﬁcation of categories 
of actions for which foreign states cannot claim sovereign immunity in US courts. In particular there is a commercial activity exception to the rule (see 28 USC §1603(d) and 28 USC §1605(a)(2)). 
Importantly, a foreign state may waive its right of sovereign 
immunity on entering into commercial transactions and this waiver will, under 28 USC §1605(a)(1), be recognised and enforced by the US courts. Given the narrow interpretation by US courts to the commercial activity exception, a carefully drafted clear waiver clause in a contract can be of some impor-tance in contracts with state companies ( see Chapter 16 ). 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act The US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 1977 was intended to erad-icate the making of improper payments to government ofﬁcials abroad to obtain commercial advantage. It makes it criminally unlawful for any US enterprise “T
o make use of the mails or any 
means . . . of interstate commerce corruptly in furtherance 
o f... the giving of anything of value t o... any foreign ofﬁcial or 
any foreign political party for purposes of . . . inﬂuencing ...o r 
inducing... [action] . . . to assist...i n obtaining or retaining 
business”.14 
13United States Code (USC)
1415 USC §78dd-2.
17.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 861/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Texas law It is important in dealing with US traders to ensure that Texas courts do not have jurisdiction or apply T
exas law. This is because 
– despite the repeal of the boldface statute (under which Texas jurisdiction was excluded only if it was expressly excluded in bold face type in the contract) – T
exas courts have tended in the past 
to accept jurisdiction very liberally and to apply Texas law. It is therefore of no surprise that the jurisdiction and applicable law is deﬁned in no uncertain terms in Shell’s carefully drafted 15-day Brent contract which states that: 
“This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accor-dance with English Law and the parties hereby submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts without recourse to arbitration. The UN Convention for the International Sale of Goods (1980) shall not apply
.” 
Corners and squeezes Oil market participants, as well as the US Senate, have expressed concern about market manipulation, in particular corners and squeezes. The CFTC’
s single most important goal has 
been to prevent manipulation of commodity prices. Squeezes and corners occur in markets where one or more participants delib-erately acquire a strategic amount of the commodity thereby cre-ating a shortage of supply and thus artiﬁcially driving the price up. 
Several sections of the CEA are directed at prohibiting 
manipulation of this sort: 5(b), 6a and 9. What constitutes a squeeze or a corner has been deﬁned judicially by the US courts and the CFTC. The key to a CEA 
violation is the manipulative 
intent to bring about an artiﬁcial price. The sanctions for such manipulative behaviour include a trading bar as well as hefty civil sanctions against the individual(s) and the ﬁrm(s) involved. 17.3.3 Commodity trading law 
Commodity Exchange Act In the US the trading of commodity (including oil) futures is pri-marily regulated by the CEA and the CFTC is the statutory agency which is designated by 2a of the CEA 
with the exclusive 
jurisdiction to regulate commodities futures and options trading. Section 6(a) of the CEA declares it unlawful for any person to 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.3/page 5

--- Page 862/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
offer or to enter into a contract for the purchase or sale of a com -
modity for future delivery unless the transaction is: (i) conducted on or subject to the rules of a board of trade (i.e. an exchange) which has been approved by the CFTC as a “contract market” or a “derivatives transaction execution facility” for that commodity; or (ii) conducted on an exchange or market outside the US; or (iii) otherwise exempted by the Commission. The New York Mercan
-
tile Exchange is the only US “contract market” which is autho-rised to trade crude oil and oil products contracts. 
The CEA’s precise scope has always been a little uncertain. 
In particular it has failed to provide a useful deﬁnition of a contract for future delivery 
. This lack of deﬁnition created 
widespread uncertainty as to the status of a number of trading instruments, including forward and swaps contracts. 
After long debates in 1992 the Futures Trading Practices Act 
was passed. However 
, it did not introduce a comprehensive deﬁ-
nition of what constitutes a contract for future delivery. Instead under s.502(a)(2) a new section (now section 6(c)) was inserted into the CEA 
which empowers the CFTC to exempt contracts 
from the application of the CEA “if the Commission determines that the exemption would be consistent with the public interest”. 
This exempting power is hedged with a number of restric-
tions. An exemption may only be granted where it is considered by the CFTC not only to be in the public interest but also con-sistent with the purposes of the CEA, and it can be granted only when the exempted transaction is between “appropriate persons” (which are given a fairly wide deﬁnition). Commodity Futures Trading Commission The CFTC exercises its jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the CEA, to protect investors, and to ensure the stability of the market. Because all exchanges must be registered, they must comply with all the requirements of the CFTC both for registra-tion and subsequently to continue operations. The CFTC thus has ﬁnal authority over the exchange’
s rule books, exchange behav-
iour, and trading on the market. This mainly entails setting guidelines, giving approvals, monitoring to ensure compliance with the approved rules and an orderly market and (if necessary) taking enforcement action. It is envisaged that such contract markets would be more or less self-regulating with the parame-ters set by the CFTC. 
Futures markets personnel fall into a number of categories 
and – except for traders trading on their own accounts – each must be licensed by the CFTC. There are also other control mech-
17.3/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 863/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
anisms such as reporting, record keeping and maintaining ﬁnan-cial requirements. Exchanges have detailed rule books which set out the standardised contracts to be traded, the way trading is conducted on the exchange, the clearing system and many other aspects including dispute resolution procedures. 17.3.4 Speciﬁc contracts 
Futures and options contracts The New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex) trades four oil futures contracts (WTI,
15 heating oil, unleaded gasoline and, a 
recent addition, the Brent crude futures contract). It also trades the following options contracts: WTI, heating oil, unleaded gaso-line, Brent crude oil and two crack spreads; one for the differen-tial between heating oil futures and WTI, the other for the unleaded gasoline/WTI spread). 
Crack spread options can protect against the changing rela-
tionship between crude oil and reﬁned products markets and provide a ﬂexible hedge against variable reﬁning margins. They differ from conventional options in that a single options position results in two futures positions when the option is exercised. 
A 
spread option is also available on the difference between Brent crude and WTI futures positions as a single options contract. 
Nymex functions with an open outcry system and incorpo-
rates the usual settlement and clearing systems of futures exchanges ( see Chapter 8 ). The exchange appears determined to 
continue with open outcry trading but has, since 1993, been oper-ating an electronic trading system outside of the open outcry trading hours. T
ogether the two methods combine to provide a 22 
hour trading period each day. 
There are two levels of regulation of futures trading in the 
US: the CFTC and the self-regulation by the exchanges them-selves of trading activity of its members. The Nymex rule book detailing the contracts is available to the public. Exchange of futures for physical (EFP) An EFP can be described as a two legged bilateral transaction involving, ﬁrst, a sale and purchase of a cash commodity and, 
15for brevity WTI is used throughout, however, it would be more 
correct to refer to this contract as the Exchange’s “light, sweet crude oil futures contract”. WTI stands for West Texas Intermediate, the US benchmark grade and the principal crude oil deliverable under the light, sweet crude oil futures contract. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.3/page 7

--- Page 864/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
secondly , the non-competitive entry of related long and short 
futures positions on a futures exchange, which are subsequently closed out at an agreed price. 
Although s.6(c) of the CEA prohibits “wash sales”, ﬁctitious 
sales and other similar transactions which are used to cause a price to be reported which is not a true and bona ﬁde price, it 
does provide for the issuing of regulations that permit the use of EFPs. Under Nymex rules the parties agree an EFP at an agreed price and the exchange settles out the futures leg of the trans-action.
16 The mechanics of EFPs are discussed in Chapter 8. 
Forward paper contracts Because of the lack of clear deﬁnition of what constitutes a futures contract in the CEA, there has been much debate about the legal status of the forward paper oil markets. Since the US District Court’
s ﬁnding in the Transnor case in April 1990 that 
Brent 15-day contracts fell within the scope of the CEA and, having been entered into for tax spinning purposes, were also wash sales, the issue of their legal status under the CEA has been a thorny one. 
On 19 September 1990 the CFTC issued a “formal statutory 
interpretation” that, in its opinion, for a number of reasons, the Brent contract did not fall within the catchment of the CEA. This interpretation is not without problems, not the least of which is the fact that the CFTC is only a federal enforcement agency
, not 
a branch of the US judiciary, so its statutory interpretations, though persuasive, are not binding. Furthermore, attached to the CFTC interpretation was a very strongly worded dissenting opinion of one of the commissioners which suggests that the interpretation may in fact be contrary to the public interest. However, the matter seems to have settled there and forward paper contracts continue to be traded without regulation under the CEA. Swaps The CFTC has always taken the view that swaps are not futures or options transactions and that therefore they fall entirely outside the CEA. In a policy statement in 1989 the CFTC clearly identiﬁed swaps contracts which will not fall within the catch-
16Rules 6.21, 150.14 (No 2 Heating Oil), 190.14 (Gasoline) and 
200.20 (WTI). 
17.3/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 865/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
ment of the CEA. It deﬁned a safe-harbour for transactions which meet the following requirements: 
1.	individually tailored and negotiated terms, non-standard documentation; 
2.	obligations terminable only with the counterparty’s negotiated consent (except in default); 
3.	absence of a clearing organisation and of a margin system; 
4.	that the transaction be undertaken in conjunction with the parties’ 
business; 
5.	that there be no marketing of such transactions to the public. 
Clearly such a statement could have been legally challenged in the courts and so the CFTC transformed this into Regulation in 1993 (see Part 35 of the General Regulations under the Com-modity Exchange Act) under its 1992 new exemptive power, whose requirements differ from the safe harbour ones. Generally they include: 
1.	that the swap is entered into between “eligible” persons, which it deﬁnes; 
2.	that it is not part of a fungible class of agreement with standardised material economic terms; 
3.	that the parties’ creditworthiness is a material consid-eration in the determination of the agreement’s terms; and 
4.	that it is not entered into or traded on or through “a multilateral transaction execution facility” (i.e. an exchange). 
Importantly, the requirement that the terms be non-standard remains and this is an important issue. Many experts believe such a requirement is contrary to business efﬁcacy and that stan-dardised documentation promotes efﬁciency, liquidity and high standards of conduct. However
, this may not be as relevant to oil 
swaps as it is to ﬁnancial swaps since the industry has not yet evolved a standard oil swaps contract, although companies do use their own standard swaps contract. 
Given that swaps are traded off-market without the guar-
antee of payment provided through an exchange, there is a concern that companies involved in derivatives trading could sustain considerable losses which may in turn undermine the 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.3/page 9

--- Page 866/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
whole ﬁnancial system. Consequently there is pressure for CFTC 
regulation in this area to be instituted. The recent demise of Enron may give further encouragement to those suggesting such a call. 
17.3/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 867/964 ---
17.4 United Kingdom 
17.4.1 Oil trading in the United Kingdom 
The UK legislation differs from US legislation in a number of important respects, adopting a different approach to interna-tional as well as domestic issues. In particular, it takes a differ-ent view of what constitutes a “futures” contract and in its treatment of swaps, both of which fall within the scope of the Financial Services and Markets 
Act 2000 (FSMA). 
The introduction of the FSMA has brought with it signiﬁ-
cant changes to the regulation of the ﬁnancial and trading markets in the UK. The 
Act, like its predecessor, the Financial 
Services Act 1986 (FSAct), covers the range of oil trading instru-ments, and will be of considerable interest to oil traders. 
Oil trading carried out in the UK is subject both to UK law 
and – because the UK is a member of the European Union (EU) – to EU law. However, in recent years compliance with the regu-latory legislation of the two jurisdictions has, in many respects, become more simpliﬁed as legislators move closer to harmonis-ing the laws of the two. The enactment of the Competition Act 1998 in the UK is a case in point ( see below ). 
17.4.2 General commercial law 
Sale of Goods Act All oil sales contracts which are governed by English law will be governed by the Sale of Goods 
Act 1979 (as amended). The Act 
addresses all aspects of the sale of goods: the deﬁnition of a con-tract of sale, contract formation, passing of property and risk, frustration of contract, delivery
, implied terms, rejection and its 
consequences, acceptance, breach and remedies. 
Section 16 of the Sale of Goods Act potentially poses special 
problems for oil trading and cif contracts. If a cif contract is fun-damentally concerned with the passage of documents – i.e. if it is only a sale of documents – then, under 1 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979, the 
Act would not apply. However, it is clear from the 
case law that this is not the position and that the best way of viewing a cif contract is as a contract for the sale of goods to be performed by the delivery of documents. 
A further problem with cif contracts under 16 of the Sale of 
Goods 
Act 1979 has now been corrected by the Sale of Goods 
(Amendment) Act 1995. Section 16 previously prevented property 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.4/page 1

--- Page 868/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
in unascertained goods from passing to the buyer – as might be 
the case in a cif contract where an oil cargo is loaded with other cargoes into a bulk tanker without segregated holds. This clearly defeated commercial expectations and places the buyer at risk. The buyer who has paid for the goods and has received documents specifying them in terms of weight or quantity ﬁnds that he does not have property rights in them and that the creditors of the seller may be preferred to him. 
The problem was examined by the English Law Commission 
and their recommendations were brought into law by the Sale of Goods (Amendment) Act 1995, which now applies to transactions made on or after 19 September 1995. The new statutory rule (20A) allows for the passing of ownership in a speciﬁed quantity of unascertained goods forming part of an unidentiﬁed bulk. It should be noted that the provisions only apply to a speciﬁed quan-tity of goods and not to a fraction of a bulk and that the buyer needs to have paid the price for some or all of the goods which are the subject of the contracts and which form part of the bulk. Bulk is now deﬁned by the 
Act as a “mass or collection of goods 
of the same kind which is contained in a deﬁned space or area, and is such that any goods in the bulk are interchangeable with any other goods therein of the same number or quantity.” This deﬁnition therefore covers oil in an identiﬁed storage tank or as cargo on a named ship. Competition law In addition to EU law, the competition law of the United Kingdom will also apply to oil trading activities. However
, since the coming 
into force of the Competition Act 1998 on March 1, 2000, the UK law in this area now closely mirrors that of the EU with a stated principle of the Competition Act being to treat UK issues of com-petition law in the same manner as issues of competition law would be treated under EU law: see Section 60(1). 
The object and thrust of the Competition Act are found in its 
two principle provisions, Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 1. Chapter 1 prohibits agreements which have as their aim or effect the pre-vention, restriction or distortion of competition within the UK. This follows similar wording of 
Article 81 of the EC Treaty which 
addresses the same issue at the EU level. Chapter 2, which reﬂects Art. 82 of the EC Treaty, aims to prohibit an undertak-ing attaining a dominant position in the UK market place. 
The common law doctrine of restraint of trade also warrants 
mention. This doctrine means that the courts will not enforce a contract which is an unreasonable restraint of trade as to do so 
17.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 869/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
would be against public policy. With the combined EU and UK competition law the role of this doctrine may now be viewed as a residual possibility only, however, in the light of the Esso Petro­
leum Co. Ltd v. Harper’s Garage (Stourport) Ltd case, it should 
not be forgotten. 
Generally speaking, traders should avoid agreeing on prac-
tices which restrict market entrance, ﬁxing prices, entering into exclusive sale contracts and other such behaviour
, without careful 
consideration of the competition law issues. Under the UK legis-lation failure to heed the law can, under Chapter 3 of Part 1 of the Competition 
Act, ﬁnd defaulting parties levied with ﬁnes of 
up to 10 per cent of turnover. This again follows the EU position. Competition law and futures trading Under the FSMA (as was the case with the FSAct) the rules, regulations, guidance, clearing arrangements and practices of recognised exchanges, like the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), and recognised clearing houses, like the London Clearing House (LCH), are the subject of a special competition law regime. Such “recognised bodies” (as deﬁned in 313 of the FSMA) will have their practices and regulatory provision (as deﬁned in 302) exempt from the application of chapters 1 and 2 of the Competition 
Act (311 and s.312). However, they will be 
subject to the competition scrutiny provisions of Chapter 2 of Part XVIII of the FSMA. 
Under this regime a prerequisite for recognition of 
exchanges and clearing houses is that their rules are provided to the Director General of the Ofﬁce of Fair T 
rading for assessment 
as to whether they, or the practices of the exchange or clearance house, have “signiﬁcant adverse effect on competition (303)”. In addition the Director is to keep under review the regulatory pro-vision and practices of any such exchange or clearance house once they are recognised (304). Reports are to be made by the Direc-tor and provided to the Financial Services Authority (FSA), the T
reasury and the Competition Commission all of whom are to 
consider them and provide direction in respect of the same in accordance with the further provisions of Chapter 2 of Part XVIII. Under Chapter 2 of Part XVIII an application for recognition can be denied or recognition withdrawn in the circumstances described in the FSMA. Carriage of goods by sea The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1971 gave effect to the Hague– V
isby Rules which identiﬁes the substantive rights and liabilities 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.4/page 3

--- Page 870/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
of the parties to a bill of lading contract. Until 1992 this was sup -
plemented by the Bills of Lading Act 1855. 
However, the Bills of Lading Act 1855 proved to be inade-
quate in addressing all situations concerning the passage of rights under a bill of lading. In particular
, under the Bills of 
Lading Act the transfer of property rights could only occur if prop-erty passed “. . . upon or by reason of the consignment or endorse-ment”. A serious problem therefore arose under cif contracts in cases where the bill of lading had ceased to be a document of title before it was transferred to the endorsee and there were subse-quent problems for the buyer. Just such a situation arose in the case of the Delphini , which was instrumental in highlighting 
the inadequacy of 1 of the 
Act and led to its amendment by the 
Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1992. 
The 1992 Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 2 now provides that 
a person who becomes the lawful holder of a bill of lading shall, by virtue of becoming the holder of the bill of lading, have trans-ferred to and vested in him all rights of suit under the contract of carriage as if he had been a party to that contract. Thus it sorted out the ticklish problem which used to arise under cif con-tracts of how a consignee or endorsee acquires contractual rights of suit against the carrier for loss of or damage to the goods when it was the shipper and not the consignee or endorsee who concluded the contract of carriage originally
.17 
Finance and banking law Bills of exchange are governed by the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 under English law
. Although the UCP has not been incorporated 
into English law, the treatment of documentary letters of credit is – for the large part – identical under English common law based on court decisions. In fact, it is rarely necessary to ascer-tain the law governing a letter of credit because banks in most countries including those in England operate credits under the UCP
, and the credit will specify the UCP in the choice of law 
clause. 
Previously, under 3 of the Banking Act 1987, it was an 
offence to take a deposit in the course of carrying on what is called a deposit-taking business unless authorised by the FSA 
to do so. 
Clearly futures exchanges and clearing houses could have been constrained in receiving and holding money on behalf of members 
17For two excellent analyses on this topic with respect to oil trading 
see [1988/1989] 7 OGLTR 171 and [1991] 1 OGLTR 25. 
17.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 871/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
trading through them – for example, margin calls and marking to market – however, the taking of such sums was exempted as a deposit-taking under regulation 14 of the Banking Act 1987 (Exempt Transactions) Regulations 1988. With the coming into force of the FSMA the Banking Act and the 1988 Regulations have been repealed but the 3 offence is now subsumed in the FSMA’s 19 general prohibition so the potential to offend against the provision remains. Now though, under Article 8 of the FSMA 2000 (Regulated Activities) Order 2001, by receiving sums in this manner RIEs and RCHs will not be offending against the general prohibition on this count as any such sum will be exempted from being classiﬁed as a “deposit” for the purposes of Article 5 of the Order (which speciﬁes the taking of deposits as a regulated activ -
ity) and, therefore, accepting such sums will not amount to 22 regulated activity
. 
Protection of Trading Interests Act 1980 The Protection of Trading Interests Act 1980 provides, among other things, that a judgement of an overseas court for multiple damages – such as the US courts may make in triple damages anti-trust proceedings – is not enforceable in the UK. Moreover
, 
a UK defendant who has paid such damages is entitled to recover, in the UK courts, the excess over the part attributable to com-pensation. Arbitration and enforcement The Brussels Convention ( see Section 17.2.8 ) was incorporated 
into English law by the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgement 
Act 
1982. 
A foreign arbitration award may be registrable and enforce-
able in the UK under the Foreign Judgements (Reciprocal Enforcement) 
Act 1933 or under the Arbitration Acts 1950 and 
1975, which give effect to the 1958 New York Convention ( see also 
Section 17.2.8 ). The enforceability of an English arbitration 
award abroad will depend on the law of the country concerned and in particular whether that country is a party to the New York Convention. State immunity Under English law, the State Immunity Act 1978 restated the general principle that a foreign sovereign, including a govern-ment, has always been immune from suit in the English courts. However
, it also created exceptions in cases of: commercial 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.4/page 5

--- Page 872/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
transactions entered into by the State, obligations of the State 
which, by virtue of a contract, fall to be performed wholly or partly in the UK, arbitration proceedings if the State has agreed in writing to arbitration according to the law of the UK, and matters relating to ships and cargoes used for commercial pur
-
poses (3). In the case of oil trading, the general effect of the Act is therefore to put state oil companies and countries tendering for oil supply in the same position as a private enterprise. 17.4.3 Financial services law 
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 Certain types of oil trading contracts fall within the category of “investments” as speciﬁed in the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Regulated 
Activities) Order 2001 (FSMA (RA) Order). 
These include futures, options and contracts for differences. Under the FSMA an activity “which is carried on by way of busi-ness and... relates to an investment” (as so speciﬁed) is a “reg-
ulated activity” under section 22. As such under the general prohibition section of the FSMA, section 19, oil traders are required to be either an “authorised person” or an “exempt person” to carry on such a regulated activity
. 
Contravention of the general prohibition is an offence (23) 
and contracts made in breach of it are unenforceable against the non-offending party (26). 
The Financial Services Authority (FSA) is empowered by the 
FSMA 
to regulate the conduct of those involved in ﬁnancial serv-
ices and markets and to grant direct authorisations, grant exempt person status, recognise investment exchanges and clear-ing houses, and make and enforce principles, rules and regula-tions with respect to regulated activities in the UK. Futures exchanges and clearing houses Futures exchanges and clearing houses can provide the venue and mechanisms for trading. Under Part XVIII of the FSMA 
they 
can apply for an order declaring them to be a recognised invest-ment exchange (RIE) or recognised clearance house (RCH) which, when obtained, will exempt them from the general prohibition in respect of regulated activities (285). Each exchange or clearing house, such as the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), has a set of exchange rules that must be complied with by the brokers and dealers trading at the exchange. T
o obtain recognition as a 
RIE or a RCH (as the case may be) these rules, amongst other 
17.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 873/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
things, must be provided to the FSA. If an applicant satisﬁes the recognition requirements (as provided by the Treasury) then the FSA may make a recognition order. RIEs and RCHs are required to comply with notiﬁcation requirements of Part XVIII of the FSMA which include provisions dealing with changes in their rules. Section 297 confers on the FSA the power to revoke recog-nition and, hence, therein lies the regulator’s control over RIEs and RCHs. Recognition requirements The recognition requirements were published by the Treasury on 15 March, 2001.
18 The criteria that must be met in order to be 
and remain recognised ensure exchanges meet principles and standards of conduct which assure integrity, fair dealing, skill, care and diligence, and subordination of the interests of the exchange to that of its clients. Areas dealt with in the regulations include: 
•	sufﬁciency of ﬁnancial resources; 
•	ﬁt and proper person standards; 
•	adequate and appropriate scale systems and controls; 
•	safeguards for investors; and 
•	effective disciplinary and complaint procedures and others. 
The exchange must also “ensure that appropriate procedures are adopted for it to make rules, for keeping its rules under review and for amending them”. Part II of the regulations requires the exchange to have in place “default rules” which enable appropri-ate action to be taken in the event that a member of the exchange is or appears to be unable to meet his obligations in respect of one or more market contracts. International Petroleum Exchange The IPE is a Recognised Investment Exchange. It was estab-lished in 1980 as a company limited by guarantee and owned by the members of the exchange. 
In April 2000 the company was demutualised and ownership 
passed to a holding company
, IPE Holdings plc, the share capital 
18The Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Recognition 
Requirements for Investment Exchanges and Clearing Houses) Regula-tions 2001 (S.I. 2001 No. 995). 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 17.4/page 7

--- Page 874/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
of which has now been acquired by Intercontinental Exchange 
Inc. Its affairs are managed by a board of directors, most of whom are elected from ﬂoor members. It operates from three trading rings around which representatives of the ﬂoor members trade by open outcry – that is, a bid or offer for lots must be made to the whole ﬂoor and may be accepted by a member but only openly on the ﬂoor. As a result, there is no undisclosed or selective trading on the futures exchange. This system though is set to change with the phased introduction of an electronic trading plat
-
form. As of February 2002 the IPE’s public website advised that gas and power futures would be trading electronically by the summer of 2002 but a precise date had not been set for the move in trading its Brent and Gas oil contracts. 
The trading ﬂoor, the procedures for trading, the traded con-
tracts’ terms, admission for membership and all aspects of the exchange are governed by its rule book. 
The Floor Members also either are members of the London 
Clearing House (LCH) or have a clearing arrangement with a Clearing Member of the IPE as required by the rule book. Each Floor Member will own at least one seat on the IPE, each of which will entitle the Floor Member to have four traders transacting business on the market ﬂoor
. The IPE rules require that every 
contract made on the IPE is registered with the LCH, through the established procedure. The LCH is a recognised clearing house under the FSMA. The importance of the registration of con-tracts and the clearing is that the performance of the contracts is then guaranteed. 
This procedure “novates” the contract between buyer and 
seller by inserting the clearing house in two contracts, one with the seller as a buyer
, and one with the buyer as the seller. 
The clearing house also operates the ﬁnancial system of futures and options trading calling for initial margins (deposits) and “marking the contracts to market” (calling for margins to be paid or money to be paid into members’ accounts depending on the movements of price). Thus the clearing house guarantees payment and delivery with respect to the futures contract made on the IPE. 
Under the IPE rule book (section on arbitration rules) should 
a dispute arise it is referred to the directors for arbitration. The arbitration board consists of representatives of members and it should be noted that should they decide to call an oral hearing that generally neither party to the dispute may be legally repre-sented. Only after the arbitration award may a dispute arising from exchange trading be actionable in court, except in certain limited circumstances. 
17.4/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 875/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Although the exemptions to UK competition and banking 
law automatically apply, the IPE has also obtained exemption (what is termed “negative clearance”) from the application of EU competition law. Sanctions Disciplinary measures can be imposed on RIEs, RCHs and oil traders under the FSMA 
and also on members of RIEs by the RIE 
itself. 
The principal sanction open to the FSA against RIEs like the 
IPE is the capacity to revoke recognition of the exchange under 297(2) of the FSMA. Such revocation will remove the exempt status of the exchange with the likely result that its trading activ-ities will be in contravention of the general prohibition. The FSA can also direct the exchange to take certain steps (enforceable by injunction) to ensure compliance with the FSMA 
Part XVIII 
recognition requirements (296). 
A prison sentence and a ﬁne can be imposed upon conviction 
of contravention of the FSMA
’s general prohibition or for falsely 
holding oneself out to be an authorised or, in relation to a regu-lated activity, an exempt person (23 and 24). 
Financial penalties can also be imposed on persons autho-
rised to carry our regulated activities under Part IV of the FSMA of amounts that the FSA 
considers appropriate where such a 
person has contravened a requirement of the Act. Further the power to cancel an authorisation is also available to the regula-tor where a failure to maintain ﬁt and proper person standards is established. 17.4.4 Speciﬁc contracts 
Futures contracts The IPE currently trades only two oil futures contracts: the gasoil and the Brent crude contract. 
A futures contract based on Natural 
Gas rights at the National Balancing Point has also been trading since 1999 ( see Chapter 8 ). The gasoil contract is a contract for 
physical delivery, but the Brent crude futures contract is a con-tract for differences because it is settled against a price index ( see 
Chapter 8 ). Unlike the other IPE contracts, the Brent crude con-
tract is not a sale of goods and is therefore not subject to the Sale of Goods 
Act 1979. 
Exchange traded futures contracts have standard terms and 
conditions – as listed in the exchange rule book – and are usually 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.4/page 9

--- Page 876/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
for standard small amounts of oil (lots), which contributes to their 
efﬁciency as hedging and/or speculative instruments. Every con -
tract made on the IPE is expressed (upon the trader’s signature of his daily dealing statement) to incorporate the IPE’
s rules and 
regulations. 15-day Brent Because the 15-day Brent contract is considered to fall within the deﬁnition of a futures contract under the FSMA 
and the bookout 
contract could also fall within the deﬁnition of a contract for dif-ferences, persons who trade the Brent contract need to ensure that they are either authorised or exempted persons under the FSMA. 
For oil traders a “light touch” regulatory regime was estab-
lished under the FSAct. The principles established under the FSAct have been carried over into the FMSA 
and the light touch 
regime continues to apply to Oil Market Participants (OMPs). 
This light touch regime results in a considerable amount of 
the FSA
’s Handbook of Rules and Guidance being disapplied to 
OMPs. However, in general terms, they are still required to have sufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources, exercise integrity and fair dealing, refrain from improperly manipulating the market or abusing market procedure, refrain from improperly or dishonestly mis-leading counterparties, fulﬁl legitimate expectations arising out of practice and avoid undisclosed conﬂicts of interest. 
A trader 
who violates these basics of market conduct may expect to have his authorisation reviewed and potentially removed. Swaps Oil swaps fall under the deﬁnition of an investment of the kind speciﬁed in Part III of the FSMA 
(RA) Order. As such trading in 
them is likely to be an activity that is a regulated activity for the purposes of the FSMA and in most cases authorisation will need to be obtained to trade in oil swaps. In certain circumstances the need for authorisation will not be necessary as the Order pro-vides for certain exclusions, for example, where the swaps are entered into solely for the purposes of risk management (see 
Art 
19). Again, however, swap traders, such as oil companies, who conﬁne their business activities to the oil sector can avail them-selves to the light touch regime applicable to OMPs. 
17.4/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 877/964 ---
17.5 Singapore 
17.5.1 Oil trading in Singapore 
In January 1989, in an effort to promote oil trading in Singapore, the Singapore Government introduced the “Approved Oil T
raders 
(AOT) Tax Incentive” Scheme under which companies with such status are granted a concessionary tax rate of 10 per cent. The 1992 Income Tax (Concessionary Rate of Tax for Approved Oil Trading Companies) Regulations are applicable to the scheme, which is now known as the Global Trader Programme (GTP) and is described in more detail in Chapter 15. Also in 1989, the Singapore International Monetary Exchange (Simex) launched its ﬁrst energy futures contract for high sulphur fuel oil ( see Chapter 
8). However, despite a re-launch in 1997 using different speciﬁca-tions, this contract, like others such as contracts for Dubai crude oil and gas oil, has not been a success. In 1995 the exchange started trading a Brent futures contract that is interchangeable with the IPE Brent futures contract. This arrangement allows the IPE Brent contract to trade over an 18 hour period. 
The Singapore Exchange (SGX) ( see below ) now provides a 
facility to trade and clear Brent Crude futures under a Mutual Offset 
Agreement with the IPE. This allows positions opened 
through either the IPE or the SGX to be cleared and offset in either London or Singapore. 
Futures contracts are governed by the Commodity Futures 
Act (Cap 48A) and the regulations thereunder as well as the Securities and Futures 
Act (SFA).19 The Commodity Futures Act 
(Cap 48A) covers all commodities and all forms of commodities trading activities including commodity futures contracts: com-modity forward contracts, etc. It also imposes mandatory licens-ing for ﬁrms and individual traders engaged in trading all forms of commodities and commodity trading activities. 17.5.2 The Singapore Exchange 
The SGX is the ﬁrst demutualised integrated securities and derivatives exchange in the 
Asia Paciﬁc region. It was established 
19The Securities and Futures Act (SFA) was passed in October 
2001. As of February 2002 the Minister has yet to appoint an effective date for the Act to come into operation. The Act aims to provide a com-prehensive rule book on capital markets, create a ﬂexible regulatory framework, facilitate the development of a disclosure-based regime and boost market enforcement. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 17.5/page 1

--- Page 878/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
in December 1999 by the merger of Simex with the Stock 
Exchange of Singapore and became a public-listed company in November 2000. Singapore Exchange Derivatives Trading Limited (SGX-DT) is a subsidiary of the Singapore Exchange (SGX) which has its roots in Simex. SGX-DT boasts the widest range of Asian derivatives in the world and the widest range of international derivatives in the Asia–Paciﬁc region. 
SGX-DT comes under the regulatory control of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS)20 through the Futures Trading Act. 
The Act requires, inter alia, the licensing of futures brokers and registered representatives to be subject to the approval of the MAS. It also sets minimum capital requirements for futures brokers. 
As in London and New York, trading is conducted by open 
outcry in designated pits on the exchange ﬂoor and, additionally
, 
a screen based electronic trading system (SGX-ETS) is used. The two trading methods complement each other to provide extended trading opportunities spanning different time zones. Clearing services are carried out by another subsidiary of SGX, the Singapore Exchange Derivatives Clearing System. It secures per-formance by the collection of margins and revaluing positions daily on a mark-to-market basis. 
SGX-DT has a rule book which contains all the rules and 
regulations of the exchange, including the terms and conditions of all the oil futures contracts. Like the New 
York and London oil 
futures exchanges it also has rules governing the exchange of futures for physicals (EFPs). 
20The MAS is the central bank of Singapore. 
17.5/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 879/964 ---
Appendix 17.1 Comparison of the procedures and rules of arbitral institutions 
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) 
Rules Appointment of arbitrators UNCITRAL Arbitration rules subject to modiﬁcations agreed by the parties. One or three arbitrators; parties agree on sole arbitrator
, refer to appointing authority or in 
default to Secretary General of the Court of Arbitration at the Hague. If no agreement to appoint sole arbitrator, three arbitrators appointed, one by each party, and the president by the two appointed arbitrators. Challenges can be made if doubts as to impartiality or independence. 
Venue for arbitration Unless agreed by parties, determined by 
Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters A
ward and its 
ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance arbitral tribunal. Unless agreed by parties, determined by arbitral tribunal. Contract, written statements of claim and defence, submitted to tribunal. Further statements can be requested within 45 days. Oral hearing but afﬁdavit evidence may be submitted. 
Arbitrators can appoint experts. 
Award to state reasons. It is binding but clerical errors can be corrected within 30 days. Public document only if both parties consent. The tribunal has the power to rule on objections that it has no jurisdiction and the existence and validity of the arbitration clause. Arbitrators’ fees ﬁxed by tribunal; must be reasonable taking the amount in dispute, complexity of subject matter, time spent and other factors. Each party may be required to deposit an equal amount as an advance for costs. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 17.1/page 1

--- Page 880/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
The Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Rules 
Appointment of arbitrators Rules of the arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce or as agreed by the parties, as to procedure. One or three arbitrators; the Institute to appoint a sole arbitrator
. If no agreement to 
appoint sole arbitrator, three arbitrators appointed, one by each party and the chairman by the Institute. Challenges may be made within 30 days to be settled by the Institute. 
Venue for arbitration Unless agreed by parties, determined by the 
Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters Award and its ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance Institute. Unless parties agree, determined by the tribunal. W
ritten statements of claim and defence 
submitted. Further statements can be requested. Procedure determined by tribunal in accordance with parties’ wishes. Oral hearing but afﬁdavit evidence may be submitted on determination by the tribunal. Arbitrators can appoint experts unless parties provide otherwise. Made not later than one year after referral of case by a majority of arbitrators or by sole arbitrator. Reasons given: clerical errors can be corrected. Rules silent. Decide by the arbitral tribunal. Fees of arbitrators to be reasonable taking into account the amount in dispute, complexity of subject matter and time spent. Security for anticipated costs. 
Appendix 17.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 881/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) 
Rules Appointment of arbitrators 
Venue for arbitration Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters Award and its ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance ICC Rules of Arbitration. One or three arbitrators. Sole arbitrator by agreement of the parties and conﬁrmation by the Court but in default, sole arbitrator appointed by Court. If agreement to appoint three arbitrators, one by each party and the chairman by the Court or the two other arbitrators. Challenges as to independence must be made within 30 days. Fixed by the Court unless agreed by the parties. Can be world-wide. Unless parties agree, to be determined by the arbitrator(s). T
erms of reference are drawn up by the Court 
within two months of receiving the ﬁle then signed by the parties. Written statements of claim and defence submitted to Court. Procedure determined by Rules and as the parties may agree. Oral hearing but, if parties agree, by documentary evidence alone. Arbitrators can appoint experts unless parties provide otherwise. Court examines the draft award and can propose amendments. Made not later than six months from signature of Terms of Reference. The award is ﬁnal. Questions as to jurisdiction (or as to the existence or validity of the agreement to arbitrate) can be determined by the arbitrator. Administrative and arbitrators’ costs decided by the arbitral tribunal based on the amount in dispute with cumulative percentage charges in accordance with a scale ﬁxed by the Rules. Advance of anticipated costs required – ﬁxed by Court. All costs payable before award is given. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 17.1/page 3

--- Page 882/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes 
(ICSID) 
Rules 
Appointment of arbitrators Venue for arbitration Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters Award and its ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance Article 6(1)(a) of the Convention of the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, 1966: The Rules of Procedure for 
Arbitration Proceedings 
adopted pursuant to Article 6(1)(b) and (c) of the Convention amended by the agreement of the parties. Can only be used where a State is a party. The number of arbitrators must be uneven and must be nationals of States other than the contracting State party to the dispute. Appointment by agreement between the parties or, in default, by the Chairman of the Administrative Council, who also nominates the President of the tribunal. At the seat of the Centre (Washington) or by agreement of the parties, elsewhere. English and French. (Spanish as soon as a Spanish speaking State becomes party to the Convention.) Request for arbitration and pleadings in the form of memorial and counter memorial. Procedure determined by Rules and as parties may agree. Oral hearings but, if the parties agree, by documentary evidence alone. Experts can be appointed. A
ward to be made promptly and contain 
reasons. It can be rectiﬁed, interpreted, revised and annulled by application to the Secretary General, ICSID. The Tribunal may consider whether the dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and its own competence. Daily fee plus additional fee for any other services provided. Advance payment of estimated costs required. 
Appendix 17.1/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 883/964 ---
17 Legal and regulatory issues
American Arbitration Association (AAA)
Rules Appointment of arbitrators Venue for arbitration Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters Award and its ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance Commercial Arbitration Rules as amended by the parties. One or more arbitrators. Parties may agree on arbitrators or the 
AAA submits to each party an 
identical list of names allowing seven days to object. In default of appointment by parties, the panel will nominate someone from the list not removed by either party. Challenges as to impartiality, bias, ﬁnancial or personal interest. Mutually agreed location or, in default, AAA will determine the location within seven days. Rules silent. Evidence by afﬁdavit and ﬁling of documents. Arbitrator may ask for statements of clariﬁcation. Oral hearing but parties may provide by written agreement for waiver of oral hearings. Conservation of property order possible. Award given promptly and no later than 30 days from close of hearing, or, if no oral hearing, from date of producing ﬁnal statements and proofs. By sole arbitrator or majority. Rules silent. AAA is a non-proﬁt making organisation and costs are according to a ﬁxed fee schedule. Arbitrators serve without a fee, but in prolonged or special cases the parties may agree to a fee. The AAA may require payment in advance. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Appendix 17.1/page 5

--- Page 884/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA)
Rules 
Appointment of arbitrators LCIA Rules as amended by the parties prior to the arbitration. A 
sole arbitrator will be appointed unless the 
parties have agreed otherwise or the Court determines that a three member Tribunal is more appropriate. The President or the Vice-President appoints all arbitrators. Challenges as to impartiality or independence within 15 days or on becoming aware of the relevant circumstances. 
Venue for arbitration Parties may choose the place of arbitration: 
Language Documents to be submitted and preliminaries Hearing and procedural matters Award and its ﬁnality Jurisdiction Costs Payment of costs in advance world-wide. In default, London unless the T
ribunal determines otherwise. 
That of the documents containing the arbitration agreement unless parties have agreed otherwise. Written statements of case and defence submitted to Tribunal with relevant documents. Tribunal encourages parties to agree arbitral procedure. Procedural rules at discretion of the T
ribunal in absence of relevant Rules. Oral 
hearing unless parties agree on documents only arbitration. The Tribunal may in advance of the hearing submit list of questions meriting special attention. Experts can be appointed. Unless the parties agree otherwise, award to state reasons. The award is ﬁnal and binding on the parties. Any clerical or other errors can be corrected on application to the Tribunal within 30 days. The Tribunal has the power to rule on its own jurisdiction including any objections with respect to existence or validity of arbitration agreement. Speciﬁed by the Tribunal in the award. Usually calculated on an hourly rate. Deposits and security may be required. 
Appendix 17.1/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 885/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk 
Françoise Deshusses 
18.1 Why risk control is important
18.1.1 What is trading risk?
18.1.2 Other potential sources of loss
18.1.3 What are the functions of a risk controller?
18.2 Characteristics of the energy market
18.2.1 Sources of price information
18.2.2 Term structure of deals
18.2.3 Cash ﬂow speciﬁcations
18.2.4 High volatility of prices
18.2.5 Lack of liquidity
18.3 Valuation of trading positions
18.3.1 Applying a valuation formula
18.3.2 Estimating prices not quoted on a market
18.3.3 Forward price curves
18.3.4 Price spreads and correlations
18.3.5 Long-term price volatilities
18.4 Determination of risk
18.4.1 Different approaches to risk
18.4.2 Greeks
18.4.3 Scenarios
18.4.4 Value at risk
18.4.5 Other tools for risk control
18.5 Operations
18.5.1 The role of operations
18.5.2 Input errors
18.5.3 Missing tickets
18.5.4 Settlement errors
18.5.5 Controlling operations
18.6 Conclusions
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 886/964 ---
Acknowledgements 
I would like to give special thanks to my husband Stephen and my colleague Christophe Chassard for their useful comments, and my colleagues Xavier Hoche, Jim Rohan and Marc Bonnassieux for their help in preparing this chapter. I would also like to thank David Long for his support and help through
-
out the project. 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 887/964 ---
18.1 Why risk control is important 
18.1.1 What is trading risk? 
When a trading company takes a position on the market it hopes to make a proﬁt. But trading proﬁts can never be certain and the company is also exposing itself to the risk of losing money
. The 
value of a deal depends on market conditions, which determine its replacement value at any moment. Over time, the replacement value of a deal changes depending on speciﬁc market parameters such as price of the underlying commodity, the volatility of prices and the interest rate. Comparing the value at which a deal was initially transacted with its present replacement value therefore measures the proﬁt or loss (P&L) made so far. 
This chapter will examine the risk of ﬁnancial loss as-
sociated with holding a wide range of trading positions and discuss methods of analysing the risk of trading derivative instruments whose underlying commodities are energy products. In order to assess the risks involved, it is important both to understand and quantify the conditions which might lead to a loss, and to be able to estimate the magnitude and probability of such a loss. Energy derivatives may have elaborate structures and determining the potential losses and risks from trading such instruments can be a complicated task. 
As recent experience 
has shown, inadequate control of trading risk can lead to losses on such a scale that even the most reputable companies may be jeopardised. 
An effective risk control unit plays an important role in 
informing management and traders of the risk of potential losses that might occur as a result of current trading positions. Although it is impossible to predict future losses or gains, it is feasible to quantify the probability of extreme losses. Risk reports evaluating a company’
s potential exposure to ﬁnancial loss 
from its trading activities are therefore an important tool for traders and senior management. The frequency at which such risk reports should be produced depends on factors such as the volatility of market prices, the level of trading activity, the identity of trading counterparties and the total size of the trading book. 18.1.2 Other potential sources of loss 
Decreases in the value of a trading book due to market move-ments are not the only potential source of loss. A company can 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.1/page 1

--- Page 888/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
also be put at risk if its cash ﬂow is compromised by offsetting 
payments and receipts that are due at different times. Although a set of trades for different maturities may have a positive value as a whole, the company may have to absorb losses from deals of a shorter maturity while waiting for the positive cash ﬂows from deals with a longer maturity. 
Cash ﬂow problems can also occur with a pair of offsetting 
trades if these do not follow the same payment procedures, for example, a swap that is hedged on the futures market. Other risks include a defaulting counterparty, which could jeopardise the company’s ﬁnancial health if its total exposure to one trading partner is too large. And unchecked operational errors, such as failing to send invoices to counterparties, could also diminish a company’s proﬁt. 18.1.3 What are the functions of a risk controller? 
One important task for the risk control unit is to monitor the replacement value of a trading book at regular intervals in order to allow traders and management to follow results. This valua-tion includes both the accounting for paid or received cash plus the valuation of open deals, although the latter might require complex valuation methods. Whether or not the controlling team actually calculates the P&L 
results, its function is to conﬁrm the 
accuracy of the published ﬁgures. This includes controlling the valuation method used for each type of deal, checking market prices, volatilities and interest rates used, as well as auditing the accuracy of book entries made in the company’s ledger. 
In addition, the risk proﬁle of the trading book should be 
analysed in order to provide traders with an independent risk break down. It is usual to analyse the effects on the P&L 
due to 
the variation in parameters such as market prices, volatilities, interest rates and the correlation between different market prices. Senior management needs a comprehensive risk report that they can use to guide their decisions. 
This analysis should be followed up with discussions 
between managers, traders and risk controllers in order to ensure that the potential risks and rewards are understood and acknowledged by all. 
18.1/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 889/964 ---
18.2	 Characteristics of the 
energy market 
In the energy market a variety of derivative instruments are traded based on a wide range of underlying commodities. These trading instruments can be classiﬁed into two groups: 
• those traded on a futures* exchange, and 
• those traded over the counter (OTC). 
The characteristics of exchange-traded futures and options are speciﬁed in detail by the exchange, including the quality of the underlying commodity
, its maturity and delivery dates and 
procedures. Every futures or options contract can be traded for several months forward according to its speciﬁc calendar ( see 
Table 18.1 ). 
There are no formal rules regulating OTC trades, however 
legal contracts specifying the details of OTC deals – for example, a master agreement and subsequent conﬁrmation for each deal covered by the master agreement – are generally exchanged by the two counterparties. The most commonly traded OTC energy derivatives are monthly
, quarterly and yearly swaps, and 
monthly, quarterly and yearly Asian options. These derivatives are based on underlying commodities such as crude oil, reﬁned products or natural gas whose reference price is given by an exchange or by a nominated trade publication. Financial instru-ments traded on the OTC market can also have more than one underlying energy commodity
, for example the Brent-gasoil crack 
spread option which is described later in this chapter. 18.2.1 Sources of price information 
Market prices are used to value deals traded on the energy market. Exchange contracts can easily be valued using prices from the relevant futures exchange, but OTC contracts are more difﬁcult to value since only spot prices are quoted in most cases. 
Futures exchanges publish settlement prices for all con-
tracts and maturities currently traded at the end of every busi-ness day. Spot price assessments for a wide range of crudes, 
* To avoid confusion, the term “futures” will be used to refer to a 
contract to buy or sell a speciﬁed commodity for given maturity
, while 
the term “forward” will be used to refer to a moment in time. 
Supplement 8 May 2002	 18.2/page 1

--- Page 890/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
feedstocks, reﬁned products and natural gas are published – either daily or at less frequent intervals – by a number of market reporting agencies such as Platts and Petroleum Argus . 
Exchange futures and options prices There are two futures exchanges around the world which trade energy products: the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) in London and the New 
York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex). These 
exchanges offer futures and options contracts on a range of crude oils, reﬁned products and natural gas (see Table 18.1). The 
Table 18.1 Oil futures markets and contracts 
Futures contract Futures maturities Options maturities International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) Brent crude oil 12 consecutive months 
then quarterly out up to 24 months then half-yearly up to 36 months 
Gasoil 12 consecutive months 
then quarterly out up to 24 months then half-yearly up to 36 months 
New York Mercantile Exchange (Nymex) Light sweet crude 
(WTI) 
Brent crude oil Unleaded gasoline, 
NYH 
Heating oil Propane Crack spread option, 
1 : 1 heating 
oil 
: WTI
Brent/WTI crude oil 
spread option 30 consecutive months 
then long-dated futures initially listed 36, 48, 60, 72 & 84 months prior to delivery 
18 consecutive months 12 consecutive months 
18 consecutive months 
15 consecutive months 
n.a. 
n.a. 6 consecutive 
months 
6 consecutive 
months 
12 consecutive 
months plus three 
long-dated options 
at 18, 24 & 36 
months out on a June/December 
cycle 
6 consecutive months 12 consecutive 
months 
18 consecutive 
months 
n.a. 
6 consecutive months 
then 2 quarters on a Mar
, Jun, Sep, 
Dec rotation 
6 consecutive months 
18.2/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 891/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
longest term futures and options maturities traded are for Light Sweet Crude Oil (WTI) on the Nymex. The Nymex now offers WTI futures contracts up to seven years forward. Publications quoting spot prices Spot price assessments for a wide range of energy products are available from daily publications such as 
Platts Oilgram , Petro­
leum Argus, London Oil Reports or from real-time screen report-
ing services such as Reuters, FutureSource , Telerate or Bloomberg. 
Many energy contracts refer to these publications for their set-tlement prices, although Platts is the most commonly used source 
for OTC contracts. Spot prices can be used as single quotes for option contracts, or averaged for swaps and 
Asian options. 
Among the many derivative products traded on the OTC 
energy market, those based on prices quoted in trade publications include: 
Platts reﬁned products Platts 
NW Europe US Gulf Coast Singapore crude oil 
Pemium unleaded Jet kerosene, 54 Kerosene Dated Brent 
gasoline, cargoes grade 
CIF 
Premium Unleaded Unleaded Dubai 
unleaded gasoline, gasoline, 
gasoline, barges 87, 89, 93 97 RON 
FOB MON 
Naphtha, cargoes Naphtha High sulphur Forties 
CIF fuel oil, 
180 cst 
Gasoil, 0.2% Residual fuel High sulphur Ekoﬁsk 
sulphur oil, 3% fuel oil, 
sulphur 380 cst 
Fuel oil, low Statfjord 
sulphur, cargoes CIF 
Fuel oil, high 
sulphur, barges FOB 
Some prices are not quoted Estimating the replacement value of deals whose underlying commodity is not quoted on the market can prove difﬁcult. Some OTC trades refer to crudes or products for which there is no 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 3

--- Page 892/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
27 28 29 30 IPE Brent Nymex W TI 
26 l 
25$/ barre
24 23 22 21 20 
Sep Mar Sep Mar Sep Mar Sep Mar Se p Mar Sep Mar Sep 
01 02 02 03 03 04 04 05 05 06 06 07 07 
Source: Nymex, IPE 
Figure 18.1 Forward price curves for WTI and Brent, 10/9/01 
transparent forward market, for example, Tapis swaps, or to maturities beyond the time horizon of the relevant futures market, for example, Brent swaps for monthly periods that are not quoted (see Fig. 18.1). 
One method often used to derive a corresponding forward 
price is to estimate the spread with a closely correlated exchange product whose forward price is known, for example, Nymex WTI. Although the spread between two products can be derived from historic data this process can prove hazardous since there is no guarantee that this spread will remain constant in the future. If a particular maturity has been recently traded on the OTC market, it may be possible to obtain market prices from traders or OTC brokers. 
If the above methods are neither applicable nor satisfactory, 
then the controlling unit must rely on prices estimated by traders. W
e will see in a later chapter what is required from the 
controlling unit to quantify the potential consequences of mis-valued prices. 
18.2.2 Term structure of deals 
The energy market is very volatile compared with other markets and its price structure can move violently from backwardation to contango. 
18.2/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 893/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
A market is in backwardation when spot prices are higher 
than longer term prices, and it is in contango when spot prices are lower than longer term prices ( see Chapter 6 ). The crude oil 
market has been in backwardation for most of the past decade. Backwardation can be considered “normal” in a commodity market such as oil because end-users are usually ready to pay a premium for immediate availability, which is often referred to as the “convenience yield”. 
As John Maynard Keynes argued
1 “in the case of organised 
markets for staple raw materials there exist at any time two price quotations – the one for immediate delivery, the other for delivery at some future date, say six months hence. (...) If supply and demand are balanced, the spot price must exceed the forward price by an amount which the producer is ready to sacriﬁce in order to ‘hedge’ himself, i.e. to avoid the risk of price ﬂuctuations during his production period. Thus in normal conditions the spot price exceeds the forward price, i.e. there is a backwardation. In other words, the normal supply price on the spot includes remu-neration for the risk of price ﬂuctuations during the period of production, whilst the forward price excludes this.” 
This argument applies to markets in which hedgers are pre-
dominantly either producers or companies handling the com-modity who are therefore long in the physical market (short hedgers) and where a risk premium is necessary to entice speculators into the futures market to offset short hedging by producers and commercial operators. 
During the last 10 years, the crude oil market has been in 
backwardation more often than contango and the forward spread has been very volatile ( see Fig. 18.2 ). In late 1989, an early severe 
winter in North 
America saw a market with strong backwarda-
tion, the nearby WTI contract was at $23/barrel while the 18 month forward contract was at $19/barrel. However
, the market 
changed from backwardation to contango during the ﬁrst half of 1990 as Opec producers competed for market share. By June 1990, the WTI nearby contract was trading at under $16/barrel while the 18 month forward contract was still around $20/barrel. 
But the contango was rapidly reversed following the inva-
sion of Kuwait by Iraq and the backwardation strengthened to record levels. In October 1990 the WTI nearby contract reached $40/barrel but the 18 months forward contract only rose to just over $25/barrel. Early 1991 saw the Gulf W
ar and the expulsion 
1 Keynes, J.M., 1930, “A treatise on money: Volume II: The applied 
theory of money”, p. 143. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 5

--- Page 894/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 20011993 $/barrel WTI nearby contract WTI 18 months forward 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 18.2 T erm structure of WTI crude futures market 
of Iraq from Kuwait, bringing prices back to more normal levels. 
From early 1991 to early 1993, the market remained broadly in backwardation with nearby WTI prices ﬂuctuating in a range from $18 to 23/barrel. But from mid-1993 to mid-1994 the market was in contango with a weak spot price falling to around $14/barrel while forward prices remained above $18/barrel. Then after a period of unusually stable prices in the $18–20/barrel range from mid-1994 to late 1995, backwardation widened dramatically in 1996 as nearby prices exceeded $25/barrel while forward prices rose to around $20/barrel. But the backwardation collapsed again in early 1997 as mild weather and the start of the Iraqi oil-for-aid deal put an end to the shortage of prompt oil that had characterised 1996. 
Prices started falling sharply towards the end of 1997 with 
the Asian economic crisis and the market moved into a deepen-ing contango as the over-supply grew. By the end of 1998 prices were approaching $10/barrel, prompting defensive supply cuts by Opec and a small number of non-Opec producers in early 1999. After this oil prices started to rise again and the market returned to backwardation as industry stock levels began to fall. Prices continued to rise in 1999 and 2000 as increases in Opec produc-tion lagged behind rising demand and stocks continued to fall and the backwardation intensiﬁed. By October 2000, nearby WTI prices surged to over $35/barrel, pulling longer
-term prices up 
18.2/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 895/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
with them. The backwardation eased and prices slipped back to just above $25/bbl in early 2001 after Opec boosted supply but weakening demand continued to undermine the market despite renewed supply cuts by Opec. And the market moved back into contango after the 11 September terrorist attacks in the US which sharply cut the demand for oil. 
As described above, the term structure of energy prices is 
very volatile. This can have a major impact on the replacement value of deals involving a forward time spread since these are composed of a long position for a short-term maturity and a short position for a longer
-term maturity (or vice-versa). It is impor-
tant for the risk controller to be aware of this fact as a ﬂat outright position may hide a short versus a long position held for different maturities. The potential loss on a forward spread depends on its time structure. Example: Impact of changing term structure on a hedged deal WTI crude futures time spread, ﬂat outright position 
Action Number of Contract Deal Market P&L 
contracts maturity price prices result 
Buy 100 Jun, Year 1 23.50 22.10 (140,000) 
Buy 100 Jul, Year 1 23.40 21.90 (150,000) 
Buy 100 Aug, Year 1 23.20 21.70 (150,000) 
Sell (100) Oct, Year 2 19.40 19.35 5,000 
Sell (100) Nov, Year 2 19.30 19.30 0 
Sell (100) Dec, Year 2 19.20 19.25 (5,000) 
Total (0) (440,000) 
Although the forward spread deal has a globally ﬂat position, since the number of futures contracts purchased is equal to the number of contracts sold, it would be wrong to assume that variations in the WTI price curve would not affect its P&L. As the example above shows, changes in market price can result in a loss or a proﬁt on a deal whose global position is ﬂat. OTC deal structure Deals traded on the OTC energy market can have many differ-ent structures but the most common forms are swaps and Asian options. Over the last 10 years, the longest maturities traded have risen from 5 year contracts to up to 15 year contracts. Due to an even less transparent market, the valuation of very long-term deals is more difﬁcult than that of short-term ones. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 7

--- Page 896/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
A swap is a contract in which a company buys or sells a 
speciﬁc product at a ﬁxed price for a speciﬁc forward time period and then sells or buys the same quantity back at the average of the prices quoted during that period ( see Chapter 10 ). These 
prices can be quoted on an exchange or in a trade publication. 
Example: Swap Company A sells to company B, 10,000 barrels of WTI per month for the next full calendar year
, monthly settled, at a ﬁxed price 
of $20.00/barrel and buys back at a ﬂoating price which will be the average of the ﬁrst nearby WTI futures prices during each month. 
Every month during the following year, the WTI ﬁrst nearby 
prices are recorded and averaged. 
At the end of each month, the 
average is compared with the ﬁxed price agreed in the swap con-tract. If the average is higher than $20.00/barrel, then company A 
will pay the company B the difference between the average and 
the ﬁxed price times 10,000 barrels, but if the average is lower than $20.00/barrel, then company A will receive from company B the difference between the ﬁxed price and the average times 10,000 barrels. This process is repeated for each month men-tioned in the deal. 
An Asian, or average price, option is a contract which gives 
a company the right , but not the obligation , to buy (or sell) a 
speciﬁc product at an agreed strike price ( see Chapter 9 ). An 
option to buy is known as a call and an option to sell is known 
as a put. If the average price for the month is above the strike 
price then a company buying an 
Asian call option would exercise 
its right to buy as the option price is less. But if the average price is lower than the strike price, the company would not exercise its right to buy as the market price is less. Asian options are usually cash-settled. 
Example: Asian option Company A sells to company B a call option with a strike price $0.48/gallon at $0.051/gallon for 420,000 gallons of Gulf Coast Jet Fuel per month for the next full calendar year
, monthly settled. 
The price is based on the mid-point of Platts quotations. The 
option premium of $21,420 is normally paid up front a few days after the option is purchased. Every month during the following year, the Platts Gulf Coast Jet Fuel quotation is recorded and 
averaged. At the end of each month, the average is compared with the strike price. If the average is higher than $0.48/gallon, the 
18.2/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 897/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
option is “in the money” and company A will pay company B the difference between the average and the strike price times 420,000 gallons, but if the average is lower than $0.48/gallon, the option is “out-of-the-money” and expires worthless, so no payment is due. Although for both swap and Asian option contracts the average price is often based on a monthly period, shorter or longer periods can also be used. 
In order to value these deals, several market parameters are 
required such as forward prices and, in the case of options, forward volatilities. However
, this information is not always 
available from an ofﬁcial source. Besides, some deals can be more elaborate than those described above and require more complex valuation models ( see section 18.3 below ). 
18.2.3 Cash ﬂow speciﬁcations 
OTC and exchange-traded deals do not follow the same payment procedures, which can create additional risks for companies that use both markets. Exchange deals are marked to market and settled on a daily basis via the margin call mechanisms. OTC deals do not have speciﬁc payment procedures although it is common that settlement only takes place at maturity
. But com-
panies might require security if the accumulated losses exceed a speciﬁc amount. 
For example, a company may buy a swap on the OTC market 
and hedge it with exchange trades ( see below ). In this case, the 
company may have to pay money out in margin calls against the futures position before it receives any cash from the swap deal. Example: Cash ﬂow problems arising from deal structure Purchase WTI swap and hedge by selling WTI futures 
Counter-party Notional Actual Maturity Deal Market Cash 
quantity quantity price price ﬂow 
June, Year 1 Buy: OTC 100 97 Jun, Y2 22.72 23.50 0 
Sell: Exchange (97) (97) Jun, Y2 22.72 23.50 (75,660) 
July, Year 2 Settle: OTC 100 100 Jun, Y2 22.72 23.50 78,000 
Since the swap cash ﬂow only occurs at maturity, it must be dis-counted to reﬂect its value when the contract is established. This is not the case with futures, which are marked to market every 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 9

--- Page 898/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
day. The hedge quantity therefore reﬂects the discounted notional 
value of the swap. Note that the hedge quantity must be adjusted as the time left to the maturity date decreases. 
18.2.4 High volatility of prices 
Price volatility is much higher in the energy market than in most other markets and the level of volatility can be difﬁcult to assess. What is price volatility? Historical volatility is a statistical measure of the amplitude of past price changes. In order to calculate volatility
, price move-
ments are generally expressed as a percentage, i.e. D P/P, or the 
compounded variation of daily price changes, i.e. ln(P 2/P1). 
If price movements are assumed to conform to a standard 
normal distribution, volatility can be measured by the standard deviation of the distribution. V
olatility is usually expressed as the 
annualised standard deviation of percentage price changes ( see 
Fig. 18.3 ). 
This means that an underlying commodity with an annu-
alised volatility of 25 per cent has a probability of 68.3 per cent, i.e. one standard deviation based on a normal distribution, thatprices will move within a range of ±
25 per cent during the course 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
- -9% -8% -7% -6% -5% -4% -3% -2% - 3% 4% 7% 8% 
ily priMean 
+ 1
 devi-1 
deviation Jan�Dec 2001 
10% 1% 0% 1% 2% 5% 6% 9% 10% 
Da ce change Number of occurrences  standard
ation standard Annual volat ility = 43.9% Data sample: 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.3 Measuring price volatility , WTI futures 2001 
18.2/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 899/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
of a year. If the current price is $100, this implies a likely price range from $100 ¥ e 
-0.25 to $100 ¥ e+0.25, i.e. $77.88 and $128.40. 
Annualised volatility measurements can be converted into 
monthly volatilities by multiplying the annual volatility by the square root of the monthly fraction of a year
, i.e. the square root 
of one twelfth. Similar calculations can be made for daily volatil-ities based on the number of trading days in the year, typically assumed to be 252 days. How to measure price volatility Unlike futures prices, volatility is not directly observable but has to be estimated. T
wo of the most commonly used methods are 
described below ( see also Chapter 9 ). 
Historical volatility Historical volatility measures the past variability of prices over a speciﬁed time period. Estimates can be made using spot prices or any forward maturity and for any period of time, e.g. 5, 10, 20, 30, 60 or 90 days. Longer periods of observation will provide more accurate estimates for historical volatility
, but 
they are less likely to correspond to current market conditions (see Fig. 18.4 ). 
15 20 25 30 35 
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 Jan 01 Feb 01 Mar 01 Apr 01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug 01 Sep 01 Oct 01 Nov 01 $/barrel 
Volatility (%) 
WTI nearby 90 day volatility 
Source: Nymex 
Figure 18.4 Historical volatility, WTI nearby futures contract 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 11

--- Page 900/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Implied volatility 
Implied volatility is the market’s valuation of the future variabil -
ity of prices which is embedded in the option premium. Estimates of implied volatility can be made using standard option pricing models, such as Black and Scholes, to derive the market’
s view of 
price volatility from the option premium and the other key parameters, namely the price of the underlying commodity, the time to maturity, the risk-free interest rate, and the strike price. Description of smile Options can be traded for different strike levels. Premiums will vary for each maturity at different strike levels. Implied volatilities derived from these premiums may not be the same for different strike levels for the same maturity ( see Fig. 18.5 ). 
Usually
, implied volatility “at-the-money” is lower than that for 
other strike levels. This indicates that extreme price moves are expected to be more frequent than the normal distribution would suggest (so called “fat tail”). Implications of high price volatility In a highly volatile market, prices are likely to move over a wider range than in a less volatile market. This has important 
Jul 
16% 17% 18% 19% 20% 21% 22% 23% 24% 
16.00 17.00 18.00 19.00 20.00 21.00 22.00 23.00 24.00 
Strike price ($/barrel) Implied volatility Jan Apr Oct 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.5 V olatility smiles, WTI options 
18.2/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 901/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
implications for the P&L result for companies trading in energy markets, which typically have higher volatilities than many other markets. 
In 1996, Nymex natural gas futures exhibited the greatest 
price volatility in the energy market with an annual average 20-day price volatility of 70 per cent. Nymex WTI crude oil futures were also much more volatile than all the other major market groups with an annual average 20-day price volatility of 36 per cent. 
After energy, metals markets are the next most volatile 
commodity. In 1996, the annual average 20-day price volatility in the LME copper market was 28 per cent. Soft commodities are typically less volatile than energy or metals, but are still more volatile than equities or currencies ( see Table 18.2 ). 
During the 1990s, the average 20-day price volatility of the 
nearby Nymex WTI crude oil futures contract has been just over 30 per cent. The highest annual volatility was in 1990 when the average reached 54 per cent and the lowest annual volatility was in 1992 when the average dropped to 19 per cent. 18.2.5 Lack of liquidity 
WTI and Brent are the most liquid derivative contracts in the energy market. Liquidity is high up to 18 months forward for WTI and 6 months forward for Brent, but decreases for longer term exchange maturities. On the OTC market, depending on the products, liquidity is high for 3 to 6 months forward and for actively traded spreads, for example Brent/WTI or key maturi-ties such as December. Lack of liquidity can be an important risk factor since it may hinder the closing of held positions. In order to measure this risk, the controlling unit can assess the bid-ask 
Table 18.2 Average price volatility in various markets, 1996 
Market Annual average 
price volatility (20-day) 
Nymex natural gas futures 70% 
Nymex WTI crude oil futures 36% 
LME copper 28% 
CBOT soya bean futures 18% 
Dow Jones share index 11% 
Yen:$ exchange rate 7% 
Gold 6% 
Source: UBS 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.2/page 13

--- Page 902/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 l Ask 
Mar-97 May-97 Jul-97 Sep-97 Nov-97 Jan-98 Mar-98 $/barreBid 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.6 Bid-ask spread for WTI futures, 27 January 1997 
spread of the market price and estimate the cost the company would bear should it wish to close its positions. This method is a good approximation, since the bid-ask spread increases with declining liquidity ( see Fig. 18.6 ). 
18.2/page 14 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 903/964 ---
18.3 Valuation of trading positions 
In order to keep track of trading proﬁts and losses it is essential to know how much cash has been received from or paid out for completed deals and to estimate the current value of open posi-tions. However, valuing open positions is not always straightfor-ward and the process poses a number of problems for the risk controller
. Nevertheless it is important to ensure that any valua-
tion is as accurate as possible since some risk analysis procedures depend on comparing a range of valuations under different market conditions. 
Settlement quotes are published for all exchange traded 
contracts at the close of each business day
. These market prices 
should be used to value exchange traded deals for both futures and options. OTC deals whose underlying commodities are traded on a futures exchange should also be valued using these settlements. 
But many OTC transactions are based on commodities or 
maturities that are not quoted on a futures exchange and, in order to value these deals, additional market parameters are required which might include the price and volatility of the underlying commodity
. Estimating these parameters for speciﬁc 
commodities and maturities will be critical to obtain a reasonable P&L result and risk analysis. 18.3.1 Applying a valuation formula 
The replacement value of a deal is calculated using a method speciﬁc to the type of deal. T
o estimate the current value of any 
deal it is therefore important to understand its payout scenario. The section below describes various methods of valuing some of the most commonly traded deals and discusses the problems that might be encountered. It is assumed that all the market parameters are known. Valuation of quoted deals The P&L of any exchange position is calculated by comparing the price of the initial purchase or sale with the current market price for the relevant contracts published by the futures exchange. 
All 
exchange-traded futures and options contracts should be valued in this way. However, due to lack of liquidity, the market may not provide up-to-date quotes for the required contract, maturity and strike price. Some market parameters will then have to be estimated in order to value the deal. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 1

--- Page 904/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Valuation of a swap 
The P&L of an OTC deal, such as a swap, is calculated by com-paring the initial price agreed for the swap with its current market value based on the reference price stipulated in the swap contract. If the reference price is an exchange-traded contract, the value of a swap can be derived from its pay out scenario using the current market prices for the relevant contracts published by the futures exchange. But if the reference price is a spot market assessment published by a price reporting agency or a forward maturity that is not traded on the exchange, it will be necessary to estimate these parameters in order to value the deal. Example: WTI swap, October, Year 2 Date of valuation 24 January
 , Year 1 
Buy or sell Buy 
Type Swap 
Swap price $20/barrel 
Pricing period October, Year 2 
Product WTI, ﬁrst nearby contract 
Payment date 7 November, Year 2 
Quantity 30,000 barrels 
On 7 November, Year 2 the calculation of the ﬁnal invoice will be as follows: 
Q ¥ (P
a -Po), 
where, Q is the quantity of oil purchased under the swap contract, P
a is the average of all the published ﬁrst nearby set-
tlement prices during the month of October, Year 2 and P o is the 
original price agreed for the swap. But the value of this invoice on 18 October, Year 1 is: 
Q ¥ (P
a -Po) ¥ Df, 
where, D f is the discount factor for the period from 7 November, 
Year 2 back to 18 October, Year 1. In order to calculate the current value of P
a on 24 January, Year 
1 a market price is needed for each pricing day in the period speciﬁed by the swap contract. Since the swap reference price is the WTI ﬁrst nearby futures contract, the average price will therefore be a weighted average of the closing settlement prices on 18 October, Year 1 for the November and December, Year 2 
18.3/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 905/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
WTI futures contracts. The weights used are determined by the expiry date of the November, Year 2 contract, which will cease trading on 20 October, Year 2, after which the ﬁrst nearby con-tract will become December, Year 2. Pricing schedule for October, Year 2 WTI swap, 18 October, Year 1 
Pricing date First nearby contract Market price 
1 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
2 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
5 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
6 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
7 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
8 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
9 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
13 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
14 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
15 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
16 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
19 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
20 October, Year 2 November, Year 2 19.29 
21 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
22 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
23 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
26 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
27 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
28 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
29 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
30 October, Year 2 December, Year 2 19.24 
Thus, the current value of P a on 24 January, Year 1 is: 
(13 ¥19.29 +8 ¥19.24)/21 =$19.271/barrel 
and, if the discount factor is 0.899, the P&L of the October, Year 2 WTI swap is estimated to be: 
30,000 ¥($19.271 -$20) ¥0.899 =-$19,661 
Difﬁculties with different calendars Since the various exchange contracts expire on different dates in the month, the mix of prices required to value swaps will be different in each case. 
Although there are only two exchanges 
offering energy contracts, the expiry dates are not standardised across commodities and together they represent a large number of different trading calendars regulating the maturities of the 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 3

--- Page 906/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
various contracts. This means that two products with similar 
physical characteristics, for example Brent and WTI, can be com -
pared only if corrections for their differing calendars are taken into account. 
As an example, a WTI swap for the calendar month of 
October will be settled using about two-thirds of its quotes from the November contract and one third from the December con-tract, while a Brent swap for the same calendar month will settle using about one half of its quotes from the November contract and one half from the December contract. 
It is important to obtain calendars from a valid source and 
to be aware of changes. This is necessary in order to avoid errors in the calculation of replacement value and risk analysis. 
Valuation of structured deals In the last few years the energy market has seen an increase in “structured” deals including option combinations such as strad-dles and strangles, and knock-out, cap and ﬂoor options. Futures and swaps are linear instruments where the replacement value only depends on the price of the underlying commodity and the interest rate. But options are non-linear instruments and their replacement value also depends on the price volatility of the underlying commodity since they will only be exercised if the market price passes an agreed level. Like options, the value of the more complex structured deals also depends on assumptions about price volatility
. 
The presence of complex structured deals in a trading book 
increases the difﬁculty of calculating its replacement value and estimating the risk. In order to understand a structured deal properly
, it is important to determine its payout scenario, which 
means calculating the P&L for every market level. Example: Purchase of a strangle, price range $17–19/barrel A structured deal such as a “strangle”, which would pay out if prices move outside a speciﬁed range of (say) $17 to $19/barrel, can be broken down into two basic option deals whose pricing models are well established ( see Fig. 18.7 ): 
• buy a put with a strike price of $17/barrel 
• buy a call with a strike price of $19/barrel 
Once the complex or structured deal is broken down into its basic components, the replacement value of each component can be 
18.3/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 907/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
-5 0 5 10 15 
10 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 
lyi iLoss Profit i i
ll opti i
i
15 
Under ng market pr ce Buy put opt on, strike $17, prem um $0.50 Buy ca on, strike $19, prem um $0.50 Strangle, pr ce range $17�19, premium $1 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.7 Net payoff from buying a strangle calculated using all the parameters required such as the forward price and market volatility
. We have already seen the importance 
of selecting the correct forward price for the valuation of a swap. To value an option, in particular an Asian option, it is important to select the correct forward volatilities as well as the appro-priate forward prices. These two parameters will affect the evaluation of both the replacement value of the deal and its risk parameters. 
It is the role of the controlling unit to verify not only deal 
details but also that the appropriate valuation formula is being used. Similarly the controlling unit should check the decomposi-tion of structured deals into their basic components. Valuation of crack-spread deals Valuing deals priced on more than one underlying commodity requires a reasonable degree of price correlation between each of the underlying commodities. For example, a crack spread option is an option on the price differential between crude oil and reﬁned products which can be traded both on the futures exchanges and on the OTC market, e.g. Nymex WTI crude and heating oil or IPE Brent crude and gasoil. Correlation coefﬁcients between the two underlying components can be estimated from past price behaviour
. Longer time periods will usually produce more precise 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 5

--- Page 908/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
estimates, but could be out of step with current market condi -
tions. Price correlations are also a critical factor in determining the “Value At Risk” of the global trading book ( see 18.4.4 below ). 
18.3.2 Estimating prices not quoted on a market 
The valuation of an OTC deal may require some market param-eters to be estimated if the forward price or premium for the underlying commodity are not quoted on a recognised futures market. This can be the case either because the maturity of the deal is not quoted on the exchange or because the underlying commodity is only quoted on a spot basis, as is the case for Platts 
assessments used in OTC swap and option contracts. 
The practical problems associated with estimating forward 
pricing parameters are illustrated below using the example of a Brent swap pricing from January
, Year 1, to December, Year 3, a 
Tapis swap pricing during Year 1, and a strip of WTI options for the calendar Year 2. In the case of the WTI option strip, estimates are also required for the option premiums and associated market volatilities. 18.3.3 Forward price curves 
The problem of estimating a forward price curve will be illus-trated by a 10,000 barrel/month OTC Brent swap for three calendar years (Y
ears 1, 2, & 3) which was originally purchased 
at $17.50/barrel. In order to value the swap, prices must be esti-mated for maturities that are not quoted by the exchange. The IPE publishes consecutive Brent prices for only twelve forward maturities, but the Nymex publishes WTI prices for maturities up to seven years ahead and these can be used to extend the forward curve for Brent ( see T
able 18.3 ). Although the IPE also 
lists selected longer-term Brent contracts up to 36 months ahead (see Table 18.1 ), they are traded infrequently and only the ﬁrst 
twelve months are used in Table 18.3. 
The prices used in this example do not relate to any partic-
ular day, but the valuation is being carried out at the start of Year 1 and the results have not been discounted. 
In order to calculate the replacement value of the Brent 
swap market prices will be needed for 37 forward maturities from February
, Year 1 to February, Year 4. Exchange prices can be used 
for the quoted maturities, but suitable market prices will need to be estimated for the remaining maturities. Estimated prices can be based on another closely related futures market such as Nymex WTI which is quoted for longer maturities and whose 
18.3/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 909/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
Table 18.3 Contract prices for Brent and WTI futures, $/barrel 
Contract Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 month Brent WTI Brent WTI Brent WTI Brent WTI Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec n.q. 
24.80 
24.19 23.58 22.95 22.33 21.78 21.30 
20.88 
20.53 20.22 19.94 n.q. 
26.68 
26.00 25.30 24.60 23.93 23.25 22.75 
22.25 
21.75 21.34 21.16 19.69 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 21.01 
20.80 20.63 20.46 20.31 20.05 20.08 19.99 19.92 19.85 19.50 19.59 n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 19.64 19.59 19.54 19.50 19.47 19.35 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
19.25 n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
19.35 
n.q. = price not quoted by exchange 
prices are fairly closely correlated with Brent. All market prices used to estimate the swap value are estimated on a calendar basis. Several different approaches can be used to extend the forward curve for Brent futures: 
A) apply the last quoted WTI-Brent spread to all 
unquoted maturities: $1.32/barrel, 
B) apply the average WTI-Brent spread observed for all 
quoted maturities to all unquoted maturities: $1.49/barrel, 
C) apply the average historical ﬁrst nearby WTI-Brent 
spread from the last 12 months to all unquoted matu-rities: $1.58/barrel, 
D) apply OTC market quotes from traders or brokers for 
the forward WTI-Brent spread to each unquoted matu-rity: $1.80/barrel for the unquoted Year 2; $1.70/barrel for unquoted 
Year 3, and $1.40/barrel for the unquoted 
Year 4, 
and the results are shown in Fig. 18.8. 
Since WTI prices are not quoted for maturities from July to 
November
, Year 3, and from January to November, Year 4, it will 
also be necessary to estimate WTI prices for these forward con-tract months. The simplest approach, which is used in this example, is linear interpolation between the WTI exchange 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 7

--- Page 910/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
17.00 18.00 19.00 20.00 21.00 22.00 23.00 24.00 25.00 26.00 27.00 
l Y2 Jan Y3 l pri
Jan Y1 Jul Y1 Jan Y2 Ju Ju Y3 Jan Y4 Jul Y4 $/barrel Brent WTI Method A Method B Method C Method D Calendar month 
ces 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.8 Estimated forward curves for Brent futures 
quotes, although it should be recognised that this might not 
reﬂect OTC market prices, which may show seasonal variations. The controlling unit should be aware of the effect of such price estimates on the replacement value of the swap and should assess any potential impact on the P&L results. 
Monthly replacement values for the Brent swap are then cal-
culated using the estimated forward price curves (A, B, C, and D in Fig. 18.8) and the resulting P&L 
is shown for each case in Fig. 
18.9. To further simplify this example, the Brent calendar price for each month has been approximated by averaging the prices for the ﬁrst and second nearby contracts rather than using exact weights based on the IPE Brent trading calendar
. The graph only 
shows the P&L impact of the different forward price estimates from January, Year 2 onwards since the results are identical for earlier calendar months as the valuation of the Calendar Year 1 Brent swap was based on quoted prices in every case. 
It is not possible to predict which estimation procedure will 
provide the best reﬂection of the market, but it is essential that the controlling unit is fully aware of the potential impact of the method chosen. The controlling unit should therefore try alter-native pricing methods and observe their effect on replacement values. 
A range of scenarios can be run for global trading posi-
tions and the results analysed and described in a risk control 
18.3/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 911/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
0 20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100,000 120,000 140,000 160,000 180,000 200,000 
l Jan Y3 Source: Cargill Jan Y2 Ju Y2 Jul Y3 P&L ($) Method A Method B Method C Method D 
Figure 18.9 Brent swap value using different price estimates report. Such reports are essential for management to appreciate fully the extent to which reported results are dependent on esti-mated market prices and on market price movements. 
The risk control unit could also decide to analyse the poten-
tial impact of the Brent swap on the company’s P&L by shocking Brent prices up and down. Such worst case scenarios can indi-cate to the management what the maximum loss might be if prices were to move strongly in either direction. In order to test this two additional forward price curves need to be prepared: 
E) increase all Brent prices (based on method A) by 30%, F) decrease all Brent prices (based on method A) by 30%, 
and the impact on the company’s P&L is shown in Fig. 18.10. 18.3.4 Price spreads and correlations 
Estimating the forward curve for an OTC product such as a Tapis swap, for which only the spot price is quoted, creates further difﬁculties for the risk controller
. To illustrate the problem, the 
purchase of a 10,000 barrel/month Tapis swap at a price of $17.85/barrel for the calendar Year 1 will be examined. The 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 9

--- Page 912/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-1,000,000 -500,000 0 
Jan Y2 l Y2 Jan Y3 ) 
-30%) 
Source: Cargill 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 
Jan Y1 Jul Y1 Ju Jul Y3 P&L ($) Method A Method E (+30%Method F (
Figure 18.10 Impact of price shocks on Brent swap value 
pricing basis for the swaps is the monthly average of the weekly 
or twice weekly spot assessments published in the Asian Petro -
leum Price Index (APPI) for Tapis. The replacement value of the T
apis swap is more difﬁcult to determine since only spot prices 
are quoted by APPI. As a result, the replacement value of the Tapis swap requires estimated prices. 
Since the prices for WTI and Tapis crudes behave similarly 
( 
see Fig. 18.11 ), the WTI forward curve can be used to derive a 
forward curve for Tapis prices. However, it is important to convert the WTI contract prices into calendar prices before applying a spread. Once again, there are several different methods that can be used (the prices do not relate to any particular day): 
A) apply the last quoted Tapis-WTI spread (spot Tapis 
minus February
, Year 1 WTI) to all unquoted maturi-
ties: $0.50/barrel, 
B) apply the average historical Tapis-WTI spread from 
the last twelve months to all unquoted maturities: $0.10/barrel, 
C) apply OTC market quotes from traders or brokers for 
the forward T
apis-WTI spread to each unquoted matu-
rity: + $0.50/barrel for 1QY1, -$0.30/barrel for 2QY1, 
-$0.10/barrel for 3QY1, and +$0.40/barrel for 4QY1. 
18.3/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 913/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
15 20 25 30 
-5 0 5 10 15 
ii ial Crude price ($/barrel) 
Price different al ($/barrel) Tapis (dated) WTI (nearby) Tapis-WTI d fferent
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Source: Cargill, Nymex, Petroleum Argus 
Figure 18.11 Correlation between spot Tapis and nearby WTI Using the same forward WTI curve as before, the three methods generate different forward curves for T
apis since each assumes a 
different price spread between Tapis and WTI. Method A uses the current $0.50/barrel spread throughout the year, but method B uses the much narrower historical annual average spread from the previous year. And method C applies a seasonal pattern to the spread based on the pattern observed in the previous year, which varied between a premium in 1Q and 4Q and a discount in 2Q and 3Q. 
Monthly replacement values for the Tapis swap are calcu-
lated using the spot price for January, Year 1 and the estimated forward prices for maturities from February to December
, Year 
1. No weighting is necessary as the swap is settled using theaverage of the T
apis spot price assessments published during the 
calendar month. As Fig. 18.12 shows, the P&L impact of the three pricing scenarios is very different, particularly for Method C which assumes a seasonal pattern for the price spread between Tapis and WTI. 
Hedging the Tapis swap with an offsetting WTI swap raises 
further problems. 
Although Tapis prices are estimated from 
the forward curve of WTI prices, it would be wrong to conclude that the overall position would be independent of WTI prices. The risk control unit should therefore use the relevant shocking parameters to track the true exposure created by the trading 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 11

--- Page 914/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000 
Jan 
Y1 Y1 Mar 
Y1 Y1 May 
Y1 Jun 
Y1 Jul 
Y1 Aug 
Y1 Y1 Y1 Nov 
Y1 Dec 
Y1 ) 100,000 
Feb Apr Sep Oct P&L ($Method A Method B Method C 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.12 T apis swap value using different price estimates 
position. For example, WTI prices and the T apis-WTI spreads can 
be shocked together, or the Tapis-WTI spread shocked separately. 
Studying the correlation between different underlying com-
modities based on historical data provides an indication of which quoted prices can be best used to derive the forward price curves necessary for valuing OTC derivatives based on spot market quotations. But it should be remembered that they are only estimates and there is no guarantee that the market will move towards them. The controlling unit should be aware of the esti-mation procedures that are being used and run scenarios by shocking estimated parameters in order to evaluate the risks for management and traders. 18.3.5 Long-term price volatilities 
Valuing OTC options, which may involve strike prices, maturi-ties or underlying commodities that are not quoted on a futures exchange, poses a different sort of challenge for the risk con-troller. Exchange options are quoted on the market and should therefore be valued using market premiums, but the valuation of many OTC options will depend on estimated premiums. 
Standard option valuation models, such as Black and 
Scholes, are used to calculate an option premium from: 
18.3/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 915/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
Table 18.4 WTI forward curve and option premiums, $/barrel 
Year 1 Year 2 
Contract Closing Strike Option Closing Strike Option month price price premium price price premium Jan n.q. 
Feb n.q. 
Mar 
24.33 
Apr 23.91 May 23.41 Jun 22.97 Jul 22.54 Aug 22.15 Sep 21.78 Oct 21.41 Nov 21.14 Dec 20.90 n.q. n.q. 
24.50 24.00 23.50 23.00 22.50 22.00 22.00 21.50 21.00 21.00 n.q. n.q. 
0.50 0.84 1.04 1.16 1.31 1.33 1.36 1.39 1.40 1.42 20.60 20.35 
20.16 19.98 20.05 19.93 19.83 19.75 19.68 19.62 19.56 19.50 20.50 1.44 
20.50 1.45 
20.00 n.q. 
20.00 n.q. 
20.00 n.q. 
20.00 1.04 
20.00 n.q. 
20.00 n.q. 
19.50 n.q. 
19.50 n.q. 
19.50 n.q. 
19.50 n.q. 
• the current price of the underlying instrument, 
• an estimate of the future price volatility of the market, 
• the time remaining to expiry, 
• the risk free interest rate, and 
• the strike price of the option. 
Conversely, the Black and Scholes formula can also be used to search for the market’
s view of future price volatility that is 
implied by a given option premium ( see Chapter 9 ). 
For example, valuing a strip of WTI call options for Year 1 
using the price data shown above in T
able 18.4 will require 
estimates of the option premium for the unquoted maturities from March to May, Year 2, and from July to December, Year 2. The strip of call options has a strike price of $20/barrel and was originally purchased at a premium of $1.00/barrel. 
Estimating the missing option premiums requires careful 
analysis of the known market parameters for each of the unquoted maturities. Implied volatilities can be calculated for each of the quoted maturities from the option premia, using an option pricing formula adapted to an 
American option, for 
example, a binomial tree. 
Implied volatilities for maturities lying between quoted 
maturities (i.e. March to May
, Year 2) can then be derived using 
a simple linear interpolation. But implied volatilities for maturi-ties beyond the last quoted option premium (i.e. July to Decem-
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 13

--- Page 916/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Table 18.5 WTI option premiums and implied volatilities
Year 1 Year 2 
Contract Option Time to Implied Option Time to Implied month 
premium expiry volatility premium expiry volatility 
($/barrel) (years) (%) ($/barrel) (years) (%) 
Jan n.q. 
Feb n.q. 
Mar 
0.50 
Apr 0.84 May 1.04 Jun 1.16 Jul 1.31 Aug 1.33 Sep 1.36 Oct 1.39 Nov 1.40 
Dec 1.42 n.q. n.q. 
0.1315 0.2219 0.2986 0.3836 0.4712 0.5507 
0.641
1 
0.7205 0.8027 
0.8822 n.q. n.q. 
16.53 19.82 21.46 21.01 21.31 19.62 
21.48 
20.28 18.21 
19.32 1.44 1.45 
n.q. n.q. n.q. 
1.04 
n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. n.q. 
n.q. 0.9699 17.85 1.0548 
18.89 
1.1315 n.q. 
1.2192 n.q. 
1.2959 n.q. 
1.3990 11.99 
1.4685 n.q. 
1.5569 n.q. 
1.6411 n.q. 
1.7178 n.q. 
1.8027 n.q. 
1.8877 n.q. 
ber, Year 2) must be estimated. Some guidance can usually be 
obtained from traders or OTC brokers who may be able to provide assessments of current market levels for unquoted maturities, otherwise it will be necessary to assume a volatility proﬁle for the remaining maturities. 
In this example, three different volatility proﬁles have 
been used to extrapolate option premiums for the unquoted maturities: 
A) volatility declines by 0.05 percentage points per 
maturity
, 
B) volatility declines by 0.2 percentage points per 
maturity, 
C) volatility declines by 0.5 percentage points per 
maturity, 
and the impact of these three different assumptions on the replacement value of the strip of WTI options is shown in Fig. 18.13. 
It can be seen that several assumptions, such as the choice 
of option pricing formula, linear interpolation and forward volatility proﬁles, have had to be made in order to estimate premiums for the unquoted maturities. Other assumptions would lead to different valuations and it is important to keep this in mind when calculating the replacement value of an OTC options contract whose market premium is not quoted. 
18.3/page 14 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 917/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
-4000 -2000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 
Jan Y2 ll
l
l
Mar Y2 May Y2 Ju  Y2 Sep Y2 Nov Y2 P&L ($) Vo atility sc enario A 
Vo atility sc enario B 
Vo atility sc enario C 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.13 Value of WTI call option, $20/barrel strike price 
In this example, implied volatilities were derived using 
option premiums that were “at-the-money”, i.e. premiums for strike prices nearest to the settlement price of the underlying futures contract. This is also a simpliﬁcation since the “smile” effect means that the energy market assigns higher implied volatilities for strike prices that are in- or out-of-the-money
. 
In order to introduce a “smile” into the valuation of a strip 
of options, the implied volatility should be derived from the premium of the market traded option at the appropriate strike level. If suitable premiums are not available, then the implied volatility will need to be estimated. 
A simple formula can be used to construct a “smile” using 
market quotes for at-the-money premiums: 
V
s =ABS (S -F) ¥a+V m 
where, V s is the implied volatility at the strike price S, 
F is the settlement price of the underlying futures contract, V
m is the implied volatility at-the-money, and 
ais a scaling coefﬁcient measured in per cent per $/barrel 
which is set to 0.01 in this example. 
There are many different methods that can be used to build 
up a smile, of which the one presented above is the simplest. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 15

--- Page 918/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
-2000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 
Jan Y2 i i il
i i il
Mar Y2 May Y2 Jul Y2 Sep Y2 Nov Y2 P&L ($) Volatility sc enar o A (w thout sm e) 
Volatility sc enar o A (w th sm e) 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.14 Effect of a smile on the value of a WTI call option 
What is important is to select an estimation procedure that ﬁts the current available market data and traders’ assessments. Once again, it is important for the risk control unit to be aware of the method used to construct a smile in order to test the impact of any assumptions on the valuation of an option. 
Applying a smile to the option premiums used to value the 
WTI call option strip increases the size of the premiums since the implied volatilities are higher for the maturities that are in- or out-of-the-money and therefore increases the replacement value of the option ( see Fig. 18.14 ). 
Valuing an OTC option for which the underlying commodity 
is only quoted on a spot basis, for example Platts price assess-
ments, is even more subjective since it requires the estimation of both forward price curves and implied volatility
. 
These examples demonstrate how complex the valuation of 
OTC options can become. In many cases, a large number of parameters have to be estimated and these might not reﬂect true market levels. The risk control unit must be aware of the impli-cation of any assumptions used for portfolio valuation and a range of scenarios should be run to assess the impact of changes in key parameters. 
However, since the number of scenarios will rise rapidly as 
the number of estimated parameters multiplies, it is essential to select the most relevant parameters in order to provide timely 
18.3/page 16 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 919/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
risk analysis. Typically, traders and management expect to receive risk reports by the following business day. As market con-ditions change, any risk analysis quickly becomes obsolete and it is more important to keep up-to-date with market conditions than to carry out exhaustive tests of every possible combination of valuation parameters. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.3/page 17

--- Page 920/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 921/964 ---
18.4 Determination of risk 
18.4.1 Different approaches to risk 
When a company holds a portfolio of trading positions it is impor-tant to be able to analyse the risks that are involved and to assess whether changes in market conditions could lead to losses. There are several standard methods for evaluating potential losses and estimating the risks associated with a trading book. 
The most common method is to investigate the sensitivity of 
individual trades to changes in a number of key market param-eters. In the case of options, the key parameters are derived from the standard Black and Scholes options pricing model. These risk parameters are usually represented by a letter from the Greek alphabet, each Greek letter measuring the sensitivity of the deal’
s 
value to a speciﬁc market factor such as the underlying price, volatility or time to expiry. The “Greeks” for several deals can then be aggregated together and presented in a concise report which summarises the risks inherent in the trading book. 
Another common method is to make changes to the most 
important market parameters and recalculate the value of the global trading portfolio as a result of price or volatility shocks. Several different shock scenarios can be created depending on which market parameters are most relevant to a speciﬁc trading book. Such ﬁne tuning requires a thorough knowledge of both the structure of the trading positions in the global book and the behaviour of the underlying markets. 
More recently, a method of risk analysis has been introduced 
called “V
alue at Risk” or VAR. VAR shocks the price of the under-
lying commodity and any other relevant risk factors for each open position in the book and then aggregates the results across all maturities, commodities and markets to provide a single global estimate of the trading risk for the entire company
. The shock 
applied to each position is a statistical estimate of the potential price change in the underlying commodity calculated from his-torical data and is usually based on a conﬁdence interval of 95.4 per cent (i.e. two standard deviations). 18.4.2 Greeks 
Greeks measure how much the value of a ﬁnancial instrument is likely to change as a result of variations of market conditions. They are derived from the Black and Scholes options pricing model and there is a speciﬁc risk parameter for each of the key 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 1

--- Page 922/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
components required for the valuation of ﬁnancial instruments, 
namely the price of the underlying commodity, the volatility of the market, the time to maturity and the risk-free interest rate. 
Greeks are used to assess the potential risk of the trading 
portfolio and indicate the direction and likely extent of changes in the value of the portfolio following changes in market condi-tions. Greeks are normally presented based on standard move-ments for the various market parameters, for example, a change of $1 in the underlying price, a change of 1 percentage point in market volatility
, or a change of 1 day in the time remaining to 
expiry. Delta Delta measures the sensitivity of the value of a trading instru-ment to small variations in the price of the underlying commod-ity. In mathematical terms, it is the ﬁrst partial derivative of a function representing the value of any ﬁnancial instrument with respect to its underlying price. For options it only holds for small variations in prices because the function is non-linear
. 
The value of delta varies between - 1 and +1. The delta 
of a linear instrument such as a future is 1 – which implies that the replacement value of the instrument will move by the same amount as a change in the underlying price – while the delta of a swap is the current discounted value of 1. But the delta of a non-linear instrument such as an option can lie any-where between -
 1 and +1 depending on whether it is in- or out-
of-the-money. 
The delta of a call option varies from 0 for a call that is far 
out-of-the-money
, to +1 for a call that is deep in-the-money ( see 
Fig. 18.15 ). The delta of a put option varies from 0 for a put that 
is far out-of-the-money, to -1 for a put that is deep in-the-money. 
Table 18.6 Greeks, a summary 
Greek Greek Risk parameter 
name letter 
Delta D Sensitivity of value to change in underlying price 
Gamma G Sensitivity of delta to change in underlying price 
Vega* n.a. Sensitivity of value to change in market volatility 
Theta Q Sensitivity of value to change in time to expiry 
Rho P Sensitivity of value to change in interest rate 
* sometimes known as Lambda( L ), Kappa( K) or Sigma( S). 
18.4/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 923/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
i i l, 
l ili
0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00 
15.00 16.00 17.00 18.00 19.00 20.00 21.00 Delta Call option: 
str ke pr ce $18/b
30 days to expiry, 
market vo at ty 15%. 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.15 Changing value of delta for a call option At-the-money options have a value of around +
 0.5 for a call option 
and around -0.5 for a put option. For example, a WTI call option 
which is just in-the-money might have a delta of +0.6, which 
means that the value of the option premium will rise by 6 cents if the underlying WTI price rises by 10 cents (everything else being equal). 
If necessary, the delta of an OTC trading instrument 
should be discounted to reﬂect its different type of payment schedule. Exchange-traded futures always have a delta of 1 since the contract is marked to market and the variation margin is paid every day
. But the delta of a swap or an OTC option should 
be discounted back from the payment date speciﬁed for the instrument to the day on which the replacement value is being calculated. Example: Calculating delta for a simple trading portfolio A company holds the following portfolio of WTI contracts: 
Buy 95 lots October swaps, delta ratio = 0.947 
Buy 150 lots December calls, delta ratio = 0.38 
Buy 160 lots November puts, delta ratio = (0.65) 
Buy 20 lots November futures, delta ratio = 1 
Sell 65 lots December futures, delta ratio = 1 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 3

--- Page 924/964 ---
22 Oil Trading Manual
Swap Call Put Futures Total 
Delta equivalent position by contract month (quantity ¥ delta ratio)
November 60 0 (104) 20 (24)
December 
30 57 0 (65)
Estimated P&L for a rise of $1 in the underlying price, $ ’000
November $60 $0 $(104) $20 $(24) 
December $30 $57 $0 $(65) $22 
Estimated total P&L impact, $ ’000 
Total $90 $57 $(104) $(45) $(2) 
Combining the deltas for several deals gives an estimate 
of the global delta of the trading book. The delta of this com-bination of deals is short 24 lots of WTI for the November con-tract and long 22 lots of WTI for the December contract. This provides a global risk analysis which can be used to estimate the change in the total value of the book further to changes in market prices. 
The short delta of 24 lots for November indicates that 
the value of the book will decrease by $24,000 if the market price goes up by $1 (and vice-versa). The long delta of 22 lots for December indicates that the value of the book will increase by $22,000 if the market price goes up by $1 (and vice-versa). 
It must be emphasised that these results are only valid 
for a very small variation in the underlying price. The example given above uses a relatively large change of $1 and is unlikely to provide sensible results for non-linear instruments such as options. However
, the delta gives a very good indication of the 
total size of the trading book exposure and provides good P&L risk estimation for all linear instruments. 
The delta for each maturity can also be aggregated. In the 
example above, the November delta and December delta are added to give a global delta equivalent position of a book that is short 2 WTI lots. 
Although this conveniently summarises the 
global exposure of the trading book, it conceals the fact that there is a forward time spread. If the November and December prices were to move in opposite directions, the P&L effect cannot be cor-rectly deduced from the global delta position. For example, if the November price goes up by $0.60 and the December price goes down by $0.40, the global P&L 
impact will be a loss of $23,200. 
Thus the aggregated delta does not warn of the risk of a poten-tial loss if prices for the different maturities in a portfolio do not move in parallel. 
18.4/page 4 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 925/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
Gamma i i
0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.05 
15.00 16.00 17.00 18.00 19.00 20.00 21.00 Call option:
 str ke pr ce $18/bl, 
30 days to expiry, 
market volatility 15%. 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.16 Changing value of gamma for a call option Gamma Gamma measures the sensitivity of delta to small variations in 
the price of the underlying commodity
. In mathematical terms, it 
is the second partial derivative of a function representing the value of a ﬁnancial instrument with respect to the underlying price. Like delta, it only holds for small variations in prices. 
The gamma of a linear instrument such as a futures contract 
or a swap is always 0, since its delta never changes. But the gamma of a non-linear instrument, such as an option, is always positive for a long position as its delta changes in response to changes in the underlying price ( see Fig. 18.16 ). 
Gamma is close to zero for options that are either far out-of-
the-money (i.e. when delta approaches 0) or deep in-the-money (i.e. when delta approaches ±
 1) and rises to its highest value for 
options that are at-the-money. For example, if a WTI call option has a gamma of 0.1, this means that the delta of the option will increase by 0.1 if the underlying price goes up by $1. 
Example: Calculating gamma for a simple trading portfolio A company holds the following portfolio of WTI contracts: 
Buy 95 lots October swaps, delta = 0.947, gamma = 0 
Buy 150 lots December calls, delta = 0.38, gamma = 0.03 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 5

--- Page 926/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Buy 160 lots November puts, delta = (0.65), gamma = 0.05 
Buy 20 lots November futures, delta = 1, gamma = 0 
Sell 65 lots December futures, delta = 1, gamma = 0 
Swap Call Put Futures Total 
Delta equivalent position by contract month (quantity ¥ delta ratio) 
November 60 0 (104) 20 (24) 
December 30 57 0 (65) 22 
Delta change for a rise of $1 in the underlying price
November 0 0 8.0 0 8.0 
December 0 4.5 0 0 4.5 
It can be seen that gamma provides additional insights into the effect of a change in the underlying price on the value of the trading book. The full P&L impact of an increase of $1 in both the November and December contract prices can be calculated by combining all the partial derivatives of a function representing the value of a ﬁnancial instrument with respect to the underly-ing price. In mathematical terms this sum can be approximated using the T
aylor expansion: 
P(x + a) = P(x) + [P¢ (x)/1!] ¥ a + [P≤(x)/2!]a2 + ... 
where, x is the value of the trading instrument, and 
a is the change in the underlying price, 
which gives in this example: 
P(x + 1) = P(x) + ( -2) + (+12.5/2). 
Thus the total impact on the P&L is + $4,250. 
Swap Call Put Futures Total 
Delta equivalent position by contract month (quantity ¥ delta ratio)
November 60 0 (104) 20 (24)
December 30 57 0 (65)
Estimated P&L impact from delta component, $ ’000
November $60 $0 $(104) $20 $(24)
December $30 $57 $0 $(65) $22
Estimated P&L impact from gamma component, $ ’000
November 0 $0 $4 0 $4 
December 0 $2.25 $0 0 $2.25 
Estimated total P&L impact, $ ’000 
Total $90 $59.25 $(100) $(45) $4.25 
18.4/page 6 Supplement 8 May 2002
22

--- Page 927/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
In this example, the gamma component has more impact on the P&L than the delta component. But, in practice, all combinations are possible. 
Once again, it must be emphasised that these examples use 
a relatively large change in the underlying price of $1 and that the contribution of gamma has been simpliﬁed since the “square” of 1 is 1. Like delta, the results given by gamma are only precise for small variations in the underlying. However
, gamma still 
indicates the potential change in delta as a result of changes in market prices. This allows traders to adjust their hedges dynami-cally in response to market circumstances. 
Like delta, gamma can be aggregated across maturities, 
however
, it should be remembered that this will also conceal the 
existence of any forward time structures in the global trading book. Vega Vega measures the sensitivity of an option premium to changes in the price volatility of the underlying commodity
. The value of 
vega is always positive, which means that an option premium always increases with an increase in the volatility of the under-lying market price. The vega of linear instruments such as futures or swaps is always zero since volatility does not affect their valuation. 
A high vega indicates that an option is very sensitive to small 
changes in volatility and a low vega indicates that an option is relatively insensitive to volatility changes. V
ega is at its highest 
for options that are at-the-money and lowest for options that are far out-of-the-money or deep in-the-money. For example, if a WTI call option has a vega of $0.44/percentage point, it means that an increase in volatility of 1 percentage point from (say) 18.5 per cent to 19.5 per cent, would lead to an increase of $0.44 in the option premium. Example: Calculating vega for a simple trading portfolio A company holds the following portfolio of WTI contracts: 
Buy 95 lots October swaps, vega ratio = 0 
Buy 150 lots December calls, vega ratio = 0.44 
Buy 160 lots November puts, vega ratio = 0.28 
Buy 20 lots November futures, vega ratio = 0 
Sell 65 lots December futures, vega ratio = 0 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 7

--- Page 928/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Swap Call Put Futures Total 
Notional quantity by contract month November 63 0 160 20 December 32 150 0 (65) Estimated P&L change for an increase of 1% in price volatility, $ ’000 
November 0 0 $45 0 $45 
December 0 $66 0 0 $66 
Estimated total P&L impact, $ ‘000 
Total $0 $66 $45 $0 $111 
Once again, the vega of individual deals can be combined to 
give an overall vega for the trading book as a whole, but this will conceal the existence of forward time spreads. Theta Theta measures the sensitivity of the price of an option to a change of one day in the time remaining to the expiry date of the option. The value of theta is nearly always negative and only changes slowly when an option is far away from expiration, but becomes rapidly more negative for an at-the-money option during the last 30 days as it approaches the expiry date. Options that are at-the-money have a more negative theta than options that are in- or out-of the-money (everything else being equal). 
-----
ii
ion 
i
0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.00 
1 0 0 9 0 8 0 7 0 6 0 5 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 1 0 
Days to exp ry At-the-money opt on In-the-money optOut-of-the-money opt on 
Source: Cargill 
Figure 18.17 Changing value of theta for a call option 
18.4/page 8 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 929/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
For example, a WTI call option which is at-the-money with 
around 60 days to expiry might have a theta of -$0.005 per day, 
which means that the value of the option will decrease by $0.005 between today and tomorrow. But the same at-the-money option with 10 days to expiry would have a theta about three times this size ( see Fig. 18.17 ). 
Example: Calculating theta for a simple trading portfolio A company holds the following portfolio of WTI contracts: 
Buy 95 lots October swaps, theta ratio =0 
Buy 150 lots December calls, theta ratio =-0.005 
Buy 160 lots November puts, theta ratio =-0.002 
Buy 20 lots November futures, theta ratio =0 
Sell 65 lots December futures, theta ratio =0 
Swap Call Put Futures Total 
Notional quantity by contract month November 63 0 
 160 20 
December 32 150 0 (65) Estimated P&L change for a decrease of 1 day in the life of the option, $ ’000 
November 0 0 $(0.32) 0 $(0.32) 
December 0 $(0.75) 0 0 $(0.75) 
Estimated total P&L impact, $ ’000 
Total $0 $(0.75) $(0.32) $0 $(1.05) 
Rho Rho measures the sensitivity of the price of a trading instrument to changes in the interest rate, but it is not very widely used in the energy market since the impact of variations in the interest rate is a second order effect compared with the variation of the other risk parameters. Aggregation of Greeks Once the full set of Greeks have been calculated for all the indi-vidual deals in the trading book, they can be aggregated accord-ing to different criteria in order to create a summary report for traders and senior management. For example, the Greeks could be added together across all maturities for each underlying commodity and presented as follows: 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 9

--- Page 930/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
DELTA GAMMA VEGA THETA 
FUEL 1% FUEL 3% WTI NAPHTHA BRENT GASOIL JET, GULF COAST TOTAL 
Although the overall risk is clearly represented for each under -
lying commodity, the time structure is not shown. 
Alternatively, Greeks can be aggregated together for each 
maturity across all commodities, and presented as follows: 
DELTA GAMMA VEGA THETA 
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL TOTAL 
Although the time spread is clearly represented, the 
spread between the different commodities is hidden. 
However, these tables require careful preparation since the 
various underlying commodities do not have the same units and need to be converted into a common unit so that they can be added together
. 
A more complete report, which is not too large but still con-
tains information about the time spread and commodity mix, might be organised like this: 
DELTA GAMMA VEGA THETA 
Crude Product Crude Product Crude Product Crude Product 
1 month 2 months 3 months 6 months 1 year 2 years TOTAL 
18.4/page 10 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 931/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
It is important to devise a report that will provide the trader 
with all the relevant information. A good compromise would be to keep the report as concise as possible without losing too much information by aggregating across products and maturities. 
The main advantage of Greeks is that they are relatively 
easy to calculate. They are also relevant to traders since they conveniently summarise the global trading positions held for selected groups of commodities or maturities. However
, it is 
important to remember that some risks, such as forward time structure or commodity spreads (i.e. basis risk), might be hidden by an aggregated report. 
Greeks also provide senior management with a useful 
overview of global positions taken by the trading unit. For prac-tical reasons, a more concise report might be required for senior management with a higher degree of aggregation so that fewer commodities and maturities are presented on the report. If managers receive reports from several trading units they will not want to read a document that is several pages long. 18.4.3 Scenarios 
Another method of estimating the potential loss associated with a trading portfolio is to change the market conditions used to value the book and see the effect on the P&L. 
A number of 
different parameters can be shocked in order to determine the precise impact of speciﬁc market movements, after which the value of the whole book is recalculated. In the energy market, the emphasis is usually on shocking prices and volatilities rather than interest rates since these only have a negligible impact. 
Deciding which market parameters should be shocked, by 
how much, and in what direction can be done in various ways. If management, traders or the risk control unit have a strong view about market trends, the key variables can be shocked accord-ingly. Or a range of scenarios can be run corresponding to differ-ent views about the market. Using a scenario which goes against the positions held in the trading book provides a useful indica-tion of the likely magnitude of any potential losses. Other sce-narios may be based on the biggest historical moves observed in the market. Once several scenarios have been run, it is impor-tant to know how to present the results to both managers and traders. 
Scenarios are also used by the futures exchanges to monitor 
the risks of default. For example, the London Clearing House (LCH) – which guarantees the futures and options contracts on the IPE – runs sixteen scenarios every night after the close of 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 11

--- Page 932/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
business shocking market parameters for each underlying com -
modity in order to determine the maximum loss that can be expected for each clearing member’s overall position. This “worst case” scenario represents the maximum potential loss that one counterparty could incur on the following trading day and is used to determine the initial margin that has to be deposited by the client as a guarantee against default. 
The main advantage of the scenario method is that it is 
mathematically more precise than Greek analysis, especially for large market movements since the value of the trading book is actually recalculated in each case. It is also more ﬂexible since prices and volatilities can be changed by a much larger amount than is possible with the Greeks. 
However, selecting scenarios can be difﬁcult. It needs to be 
done in a very systematic way if it is to provide a useful result. Depending on the size of the trading book, it may also be time consuming and even cumbersome to shock a large number of prices and volatilities and then recalculate the value of the book. In many cases, certain scenarios are only run infrequently
, say 
once a month. One of the main determinants of the number of scenarios that can be run is likely to be the ﬂexibility of the com-puter system, which may limit how many parameters can be shocked and how frequently scenarios can be run. 
Nevertheless, scenarios are an important risk management 
tool and the assumptions and results should be discussed by risk controllers, traders and managers so that they all understand and accept the risks being taken and the scale of the potential losses involved. 18.4.4 Value at risk 
Neither of the two previous methods provides any guidance in selecting realistic potential market moves. 
An alternative 
method, is “value at risk” or VAR. Like scenario analysis, VAR shocks each position held in the book, but the likely move-ment is determined from historical changes in price, volatility and correlation factors for each market parameter and for each maturity using a range of two standard deviations (i.e. 95.4 per cent of all past movements if price changes conform to a normal distribution). 
These market moves are then applied to each position in the 
trading book in order to provide an estimate of the maximum potential loss (within a pre-deﬁned conﬁdence limit) for all commodities and maturities individually
, usually over a period of 
one day. With VAR, the results for different commodities and 
18.4/page 12 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 933/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
maturities are then aggregated using correlation factors which are also based on historical data. This aggregation provides a global estimate of the total value at risk for the entire trading book. 
The potential loss that the book will face the following 
trading day is on average smaller than the maximum loss esti-mated by the value at risk calculation, although there is a small probability (2.3 per cent if a range of two standard deviations is used) that the loss will be higher
. Another way of looking at this 
is to say that potential loss incurred by the current positions in the trading book is only likely to exceed the value at risk esti-mate on about 6 days in the next trading year (there are about 256 trading days in a year). Using a price range of three stan-dard deviations (99.7 per cent conﬁdence limit) for the value at risk estimates will reduce the uncertainty to less than 1 day in the trading year
. This analysis, of course, assumes that all the 
chosen market parameters behave in line with the historical data sample that was used. 
The main advantage of VAR is that it provides a simple, 
objective and concise report for management. It is especially useful for the management of a company which is active in a range of different markets (e.g. precious metals, energy
, fore x... ) 
and needs to compare the risk exposure of the different trading units. It is also easier for management to interpret a single result rather than having to analyse several different “Greek” reports. 
In order to monitor and control ﬁnancial risk, management 
can set a limit based on value at risk for individual trading units. As a result, management can be conﬁdent that the trading loss over the next day should not exceed the value at risk ﬁgure on more than 6 days in the year if the calculation is based on two standard deviations. However
, management should be aware 
that value at risk does not show the losses that the company would bear if the market should move drastically in one direc-tion or another, i.e. outside the two standard deviation range on which the calculation is based. 18.4.5 Other tools for risk control 
Another tool that is used to help management control the risk of a speciﬁc trading book is to set a limit for each trading unit in terms of delta equivalents for particular aggregations of com-modities and maturities. Limits can also be set for each risk measure that is applied to the trading book. It is up to the man-agement to decide which limits are needed to control the risks being taken by the various trading desks or individual traders. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.4/page 13

--- Page 934/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
It is also important to estimate the costs that a company 
would bear should it wish to close all its positions. Since all posi -
tions are usually valued at the mid-point of market quotes, this exercise values the impact on the company’
s P&L of buying at 
the high and selling at the low end of the bid-ask spread. In order to make a complete estimate, any commission, operational costs and management costs should also be taken into account. 
18.4/page 14 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 935/964 ---
18.5 Operations 
18.5.1 The role of operations 
Inputting and conﬁrming deals In order to be able to reconcile a company’s trading activities with its ﬁnancial records, all deals must be entered into a deal data-
base. This can be done directly by the traders themselves or by the backofﬁce, either on the day they are transacted or not later than the following day
. Once the trades carried out on a particu-
lar business day have been recorded, the deal database should be checked for any errors or omissions. Exchange trades: All exchange deals should be compared with the summary pro-vided by the company’s clearing broker and any discrepancies investigated immediately
. Nowadays this process can be carried 
out electronically. Once all the deals have been conﬁrmed, traders can be informed of the positions they hold with the exchange for each contract and maturity. 
A margin call is agreed and settled daily between the clear-
ing broker and the company after all the contracts have been “marked to market” using the closing prices for the previous busi-ness day. Companies trading in oil futures and option contracts must pay an initial margin determined by the exchange on any open position, which may change according to circumstances, and then pay a daily variation margin, which represents the change in the market valuation of their open positions from one day to the next. The size of the margin call from the clearing house should match to the cent the amount calculated using the 
company’
s own internal deal and pricing database. This is a good 
way of ensuring that all exchange trades and settlement prices are properly recorded. OTC trades: All OTC deals should be conﬁrmed with the relevant counter-parties. Conﬁrmation procedures vary and it will be necessary to involve the company’
s legal department in order to ensure that 
the appropriate documentation is exchanged with clients in due time. 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.5/page 1

--- Page 936/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
Inputting market prices and volatilities 
Since market prices and volatilities are required to calculate the replacement value of deals it is essential to maintain a compre
-
hensive and accurate database of settlement prices and option premiums. While the prices of most exchange-traded contracts and a number of the most widely-used OTC reference prices, such as Platts Brent dated, can be downloaded electronically from 
sources such as Reuters , other market price data might have to 
be entered by hand. Calculating invoices and following up payment Settlement prices need to be recorded to allow the calculation of averages which are used to settle OTC contracts such as swaps and 
Asian options. A sophisticated data-handling system might 
automate this process, including the generation of invoices. Once the invoice is calculated, the operations department needs to ensure that the correct amounts are paid or received by the company for each deal. Calculating ledger P&L At the end of each month, the operations department should prepare a P&L 
report which combines the valuation of open 
trading positions with the company’s ledger for closed positions. 18.5.2 Input errors 
Data input errors Nowadays, companies rely more and more on electronic feeds to data-handling systems, either from in-house sources or external suppliers. However
, some data is still entered by hand and the 
consequences of an input error can be serious for a company. For example, a trader might take a bad hedging decision as a result of the wrong information about trading positions. This could easily arise if data on prices or quantities are entered incorrectly, for instance recording a deal as a purchase instead of a sale (or vice versa). 
Although the margin call check will highlight mistakes 
made on exchange trades, it is more difﬁcult to spot errors that occur while inputting OTC trades. Errors can be identiﬁed by double-checking the input, by monitoring the conﬁrmations exchanged with counterparties, or by noticing that an invoiced amount disagrees with that calculated by the client. 
18.5/page 2 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 937/964 ---
18 Controlling ﬁnancial risk
In the case of linear instruments, such as futures or swaps, 
data input errors will only have an impact on the company’s P&L. However, in the case of other, non-linear, deals such as exchange-traded options, OTC Asian options or any exotic “structured” deals, data input errors might also affect the company’s risk parameters (Greeks) as well as its P&L. Incorrect invoices It goes without saying that the amount invoiced for a deal must correspond to the amount used for the P&L 
calculation, unless 
the invoice is incorrect. 
Another important responsibility for the operations de-
partment is controlling the company’s cash ﬂow. This means verifying that every invoice or margin call is properly settled and that the company pays or receives the correct amount at the right time. Failing to do so can jeopardise the company’
s cash 
ﬂow. 
Double-checking is probably the best way to minimise these 
sorts of errors. 18.5.3 Missing tickets 
One of the most difﬁcult areas for the operations department to control is missing or superﬂuous tickets, which can be a problem for OTC trades. For example, there may be extra tickets for non-existent trades or missing tickets for trades that have taken place, which could be either the result of fraudulent activity or genuine omissions by traders. The only way to detect that the trading records on the company’
s system are incomplete or incor-
rect, is when conﬁrmation is received from clients. Experience shows that a thorough comparison of conﬁrmations received with deals recorded on the database helps to expose gaps in the company’
s knowledge of speciﬁc transactions. However, spotting 
missing trades depends on whether the company sends the conﬁrmation out or receives it. 18.5.4 Settlement errors 
Wherever possible, market prices should be downloaded from existing sources in order to minimise input errors. However
, some 
quotes are not available from ofﬁcial sources and have to be entered manually. Incorrect prices or volatilities will result in the company using the wrong delta equivalent for options, and trading decisions will be based on the wrong assumptions since 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.5/page 3

--- Page 938/964 ---
Oil Trading Manual
the book will be marked to market incorrectly and therefore 
provide inaccurate risk parameters. 
Input errors with prices will have different consequences 
depending on whether the price is being used for valuing posi-tions or whether it is being used for calculating averages. Prices used to value the trading book at a speciﬁc date are regularly updated for each valuation, therefore mistakes should be noticed whenever a new valuation is performed. However
, prices used to 
construct an average are accumulated and errors in recording a spot price settlement may not be noticed at the time and will generate incorrect averages and therefore the wrong invoice amounts. 
It is important that price information is shared by a 
maximum of number of units and users in the company in order to increase chances of spotting inaccurate market parameters. 18.5.5 Controlling operations 
Senior management and traders base some of their decisions on the risk analysis and P&L 
reports. One of the important func-
tions of the risk control unit is to conﬁrm the accuracy of these reports. In order to ensure this, the following steps should be taken: 
•	The operations department and the risk control unit must agree on all the procedures necessary to provide the information required by the risk control unit. 
•	The risk control unit must deﬁne which operational controls need to be in place in order for it to feel con-ﬁdent when signing off P&L or risk analysis docu-ments. Some checks might be performed randomly and some at regular intervals. Checks on prices and deals could be controlled randomly
, while a regular data 
check should be performed, for example, at the end of the month. 
•	The systems used to help with the valuation of a trading book may vary
, however it is usual to have a 
single system to value realised and unrealised posi-tions. The valuation report must tie up with a result which combines cash received or paid (ledger) plus the valuation of open positions. 
•	The risk control unit also needs to sign the ledger P&L. In order to do so, accounting procedures must also be known to and approved by the risk control unit. 
18.5/page 4	 Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 939/964 ---
18.6 Conclusions 
Risk should be reported on a regular basis – normally daily – both to traders and to managers. Traders need a more detailed risk report to manage their positions effectively, but managers want a concise report which provides an overview. Both traders and managers need to understand which criteria and levels of aggre-gation have been selected for speciﬁc reports. 
Traders are expected to comment on risk reports, especially 
pointing out any P&L 
result or “Greeks” that look incorrect. 
Although it is up to the controlling unit to initiate risk scenar-ios, traders can also request speciﬁc scenarios based on their view of the market. Managers also can request speciﬁc scenarios to be run, especially those which have an interaction with other trading units. There should be regular discussions between traders and management in order to ensure that risk reports are properly acknowledged. 
Any trading entity should make sure that it obeys and con-
forms to the rules and regulations of the different regulatory authorities, such as the US Commodity Futures T
rading 
Commission* (CFTC), the UK Securities and Futures Authority† 
(SFA), and the Bank for International Settlements§ (BIS). All 
regulatory authorities require speciﬁc information at regular intervals which the controlling unit should be responsible for preparing and supplying (see Chapter 17). 
* www.cftc.gov 
†www.fsa.gov.uk/sfa 
§www.bis.org 
Supplement 8 May 2002 18.6/page 1

--- Page 940/964 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Page 941/964 ---
Index
15-day Brent, 4.2/4 
CFDs, 7.3/4 
forward paper contract, 7.3/1 
liquidity, 7.3/2 
market, 7.2/4 
market participants, 7.3/7 
regulation, 14.4/10 
tax reference price, 7.3/4 
tax-spinning, 7.3/4 
terminology, 7.3/2 
trading volumes, 7.3/3 
see also Brent 
AAA (American Arbitration 
Association), App 17.1 /5 
Abkatum, 4.8/7 
Abu al-Bukhoosh (ABK), 4.6/10 
Abu Dhabi 
ofﬁcial prices, 4.6 /10
production, 4.6/9
spot market, 4.6/10
Access trading, 4.5 /2 
accounting, 13.1/4, 14.2/1 
accounts analysis services, 
13.4/3 
anticipated transactions
, 14.4/9 
commission payments, 14.4/1, 
14.7/3 
designation of transactions
, 
14.4/5 
disclosure requirements, 
14.9/1–6
documentation, 14.4/12
early termination, 14.4
/10
effectiveness requirement,
14.4/6, 14.7/1 
enterprise risk, 14.4
/6 
forward contracts, 14.5/1–3 
futures contracts, 14.4/1–13 
gross/net basis, 14.5/1 
Supplement 8 May 2002 grouping transactions, 14.4/8 
hedge accounting criteria, 
14.3/1, 14.4/2, 14.6/7 
margin payments, 14.4/1, 
14.7/3 
options contracts
, 14.7/1–4 
physical hedges, 14.8/1–3 
proﬁt recognition, 14.7/2 
speculative inventories, 14.8/2 
swaps, 14.6/1–7 
valuation of contracts, 14.4/11 
ADP (alternative delivery 
procedure), 8.3 /9 
advanced payments, 12.3/4 
AFM Oil Market Report, 3.5/8 
agencies, 15.2/3, 15.2/9, 16.3/43 
airline hedge, 9.3/2 
Alaskan North Slope (ANS), 
4.5/6, 4.5 /7, 7.4/3 
Alba, 4.2/7, 4.2/8 
Albacora, 4.8/3 
Algeria 
condensate, 4.3 /3
ofﬁcial prices, 4.3/4
production, 4.3/3
alternative delivery procedure 
(ADP), 8.3
/9 
alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
15.3/4 
American Arbitration Association 
(AAA), App 17.1 /5 
American options, 9.2/6, 10.4/5 
Andrew/Cyrus, 4.2/6 
Angola 
export crudes, 4.4 /4 
production, 4.4 /3 
anti-trust legislation, 17.3/2 
anticipated transactions, 14.4/9 
API gravity, 2.5/2

--- Page 942/964 ---
Index
APPI, 3.3/6 
Approved Oil Trader Scheme, 
15.4/1, 15.4/6, 17.5/1 
ARA 
fuel oil market, 5.2/13 
gasoil market, 5.2/8 
jet kerosine market, 5.2/5 
naphtha market, 5.2/5 
Arab Extra Light, 4.6 /2 
Arab Heavy, 4.6/2 
Arab Light, 4.6/2 
Arab Medium, 4.6/2 
Arab Oil and Gas, 3.5/8 
arbitrage, 5.1/2, 6.3/4, 6.3/5, 6.4/6 
cash and carry trades, 6.3 /4 
conversion arbitrage, 9.4/2 
crack spread arbitrage, 6.4/7, 
8.2/8
heating oil arbitrage
, 6.4/6
vessel arbitrage, 12.7/4
arbitration, 16.3 /42, 17.2/18, 
17.4/5, App 17.1/1–6 
ARCH models
, 11.5/2 
Ardjuna, 4.7/4 
Argentina, 4.8/1 
export crudes, 4.8 /3
production, 4.8/1
YPF, 4.8/1
Argus Global Markets (AGM), 
3.5/8 
Arkwright, 4.2
/6 
aromatics, 2.5/3 
Arun Condensate, 4.7/4 
Ashtart, 4.3/8 
Asia Paciﬁc 
crude exporters, 4.7 /1 
crudes, 4.7/1 
fuel oil market, 5.4/16 
fuel oil speciﬁcations, 5.4/16 
gasoil market, 5.4/10 
gasoil speciﬁcations, 5.4/11 
jet/kerosine market, 5.4/8 
LSWR market, 5.4/14 
naphtha market, 5.4/6 
oil demand, 5.4/1 
product imports, 5.4/1 
Asian options, 9.2 /6, 10.4/5, 
18.2/8 Asian Petroleum Price Index 
(APPI), 3.5 /9, 4.7/1 
assignment clauses, 16.3/35 
associated gas, 2.5/6 
atmospheric distillation, 2.6/4 
Attaka, 4.7/3 
attestation, 16.3/3 
Auger, 4.5/5 
Australia 
export crudes, 4.7 /7 
production, 4.7/6 
Automatic Adjustment Factor 
(AAF), 4.6 /4 
average price option, 10.4/5 
average price swaps, 14.6/1 
Bach Ho, 4.7 /9 
Bachaquero, 4.8/11 
Bachelier, Louis, 11.5/1 
backwardation, 3.2/2, 6.3/3, 6.3/5, 
10.3/6, 11.5/4, 18.2/4, 
18.2
/5 
hedging strategy, 11.7/10 
Badak, 4.7
/4 
Balder, 4.2/3, 4.2/9 
Banff, 4.2/6 
banks 
banking law, 17.4 /4
and credit checks, 13.4/1
barge market 
ARA, 5.2
/4, 5.2/8, 5.2/13 
NY Harbor, 5.3/10, 5.3/6 
US Gulf Coast, 5.3/17, 5.3/18 
US north-east, 5.3/12 
Barracuda, 4.8 /3 
Barrow Island, 4.7/7 
basis risk, 6.4/7, 6.4/8, 11.7/13 
Basrah Light, 4.6/6 
BCF-17, 4.8/11 
Belayim, 4.3/6 
Belida, 4.7/4 
benzene, 2.4/5 
benzene content gasoline, 5.2/2 
Berri, 4.6/2 
Beryl, 4.2/8 
best practice guidelines, 13.1/3 
bid/offer spread, 11.3/2 
bills of exchange, 17.2/9, 17.4/4 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 943/964 ---
Index
bills of lading, 12.4/1, 13.3/2, 
16.2/4, 16.4/4, 17.2/14, 
17.4/4 
Bintilu, 4.7 /6 
bitumen, 2.4/8 
Black-Scholes model, 9.4/11, 
10.4/7, 11.5 /1, 18.3/12–13 
blending 
fuel oil, 2.6
/12 
gasoline, 2.6/12 
properties, 2.6/13 
Blenheim, 4.2 /7 
Bloomberg, 7.2/5 
Bloomberg Energy, 3.5/9 
Bonny Light, 4.4/2, 4.5/5, 8.2/3 
Bonny Medium, 4.4/2 
bookouts, 6.2/2, 6.4/1, 7.2/2, 
12.3/1–7 
advanced pa
yments, 12.3/4 
base prices, 12.3/2–3 
Brent market, 12.3/1–6, 
App12.2 /1, 16.3 /15–20 
contract clauses, 16.3/15–20 
discounts, 12.3/4 
reasons against, 12.3/5 
reasons for, 12.3/4 
Boscan, 4.8 /11 
Boston Bingo, 5.3/5, 7.4/3 
Boston Harbor, 7.4/4 
branch ofﬁces taxation, 15.2/3, 
15.3/4, 15.4/4 
Brass River
, 4.4/2 
Brazil, 4.8/3 
export crudes, 4.8 /4 
production, 4.8 /3 
Brega, 4.3/5 
Brent, 4.2/1, 4.2/7, 4.3/7, 4.4/3, 
4.5/5, 4.6 /2, 4.6/13, 4.7/3 
bookouts, 12.3/1–6, App 12.2/1, 
16.3/15–20 
CFDs
, 4.2/4, 7.1/2 
dated, 4.2/4, 7.3/2 
delivery procedures, 8.3/3, 
8.3/4 
forw
ard price curves, 18.3/6–9 
futures and forwards, 4.2/4, 
6.1/1, 6.4 /2, 8.1/5, 8.2/7, 
8.2/11 liquidity, 18.2/13 
see also 15-da y Brent 
Brent Blend, 7.3/2 
Bridge Telerate, 3.3/2, 3.5/1, 
3.5/4, 3.5 /9, 7.2/5 
British National Oil Corporation 
(BNOC), 12.3 /1 
brokers, 3.5/2, 13.1/2 
Brussels Convention, 17.4/5 
Bu Attifel, 4.3/5 
Buckeye Pipeline, 5.3/6 
bunker market 
ARA, 5.2 /13
Mediterranean, 5.2/12
Singapore, 5.4/17
US Gulf coast, 5.3/15
US west coast, 5.3/20
The Bunker News Daily, 3.5 /9 
Cabinda, 4.4 /3, 4.5/5 
California Air Resources Board, 
5.3/18 
call options, 9.2/1, 9.2/2, 9.2/8, 
9.2/10 
put-call parity, 9.4 /1 
Cameroon, production, 4.4/5 
Campos Basin, 4.8/3 
Canadon Seco, 4.5/7, 4.8/3 
Caño Limon, 4.5/5, 4.5/7, 4.8/5 
Cantarell, 4.8/7 
capital gains/losses, 15.2/4, 
15.3/4, 15.5 /2 
caps, 14.6/3 
Captain, 4.2/3, 4.2/8 
cargo loss, 12.5/1 
cargo market 
Boston, 5.3 /5, 5.3/10
Europe, 5.2/3, 5.2/4, 5.2/8,
5.2/9, 5.2 /13 
Mediterranean, 5.2/4, 5.2/9 
NY Harbor, 5.3/5 
Singapore, 5.4/4, 5.4/9, 5.4/14 
US Gulf coast, 5.3/7, 5.3/10, 
5.3/15, 5.3 /17 
carriage contracts, 16.2/3–5 
Carriage of Goods by Sea Acts, 
16.4/3–4, 17.4 /3 
cash and carry trades, 6.3/4 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 944/964 ---
Index
cash ﬂow risk, 18.1/2, 18.2/9 
Cash WTI, 4.5/2 
catalytic cracking, 2.6/9 
catalytic reforming, 2.6/7 
CCR units, 2.6/7 
certiﬁcates of quality, 16.3/7, 
16.3/28 
cetane number, 2.4/7 
Ceyhan, 4.3/1, 4.3/9 
CFD, 7.1/2 
Brent, 7.3 /4 
Challis, 4.7/7 
charter contracts, 16.2/4–5 
charter party demurrage, 
12.6/1 
c
harterparties, 12.7/3, 16.2/4, 
17.2/14–15 
China 
crude exports
, 4.7/8 
production, 4.7/8 
Cinta, 4.7 /3 
claims procedures, 16.3/6 
Clayton Act (1914), 17.3/3 
Clean Air Act (CAA), 5.3/3, 5.3/9, 
5.3/18, 7.4 /4 
clearing houses, 6.2/1, 8.5/1–2, 
17.4/6, 17.4/7, 17.4/9 
c
loud point, 2.4/6 
cold ﬁlter plugging point (CFPP), 
2.4/6 
Colombia, 4.8 /4 
export crudes, 4.8/5 
production, 4.8/4 
Colonial Pipeline, 4.3 /6, 5.3/11, 
5.3/12, 5.3 /7, 7.4/3
delivery cycles, 7.4/3
gasoline codes, 5.2/4
product codes, 5.3/7
Columba B, 4.2 /6 
commercial traders, 8.1/6 
commission payments, 14.4/1, 
14.7/3 
Commodity Exchange Act (CEA), 
7.2
/1, 10.2/10, 17.3/1, 
17.3/5 
Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC), 6.2
/4, 
7.2/1, 10.2/10, 17.3/6 
commodity trading law, 17.3/5 communication, contract clauses, 
16.3/39 
competition la
w, 17.3/2, 17.4/2 
CONCAWE, 2.72 
condensate, 2.5/6 
conﬁrmed letters of credit, 
17.2/11 
conﬁrming deals
, 18.5/1 
Congo 
export crudes, 4.4 /5, 4.4/6 
production, 4.4 /5 
Conradsen carbon residues, 2.4/7 
contango, 3.2/6, 6.3/3, 6.3/5, 
10.3/6, 11.5 /4, 18.2/4, 
18.2/5 
hedging strategy, 11.7 /10 
contract demurrage, 12.6/1 
contracts, 17.1/1 
arbitration, 16.3/42, 17.2/18, 
17.4/5, App 17.1 /1–6 
areas of dispute, 16.1/1 
assignment clauses, 16.3/35 
bills of lading, 16.2/4, 16.4/4, 
17.2/14 
bookouts
, 16.3/15–20 
carriage contracts, 16.2/3–5 
charter contracts, 16.2/4–5 
claims procedures, 16.3/6 
communication method, 
16.3/39 
date of agreement, 16.3
/3 
deﬁnitions, 16.3/4 
delivery notiﬁcation, 16.3/23 
delivery times, 16.3/20 
dispute resolution, 16.3/40, 
17.2/18
duties and taxes
, 16.3/34
entire agreement clauses,
16.3/44
ex-ship delivery
, 16.3/21,
16.3/22 
express terms
, 16.3/1–45 
force majeure, 16.3/29 
governing law, 16.3/40 
hardship clauses, 16.3/11 
implied terms, 16.4/1–6 
incorporated terms, 16.5/1–6, 
17.2/1–2 
inspection procedures
, 16.3/27 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 945/964 ---
Index
legal requirements for valid 
contracts, 16.2/1, 16.2/3, 
16.4/1–3 
liability limitations, 16.3 /37 
loading conditions, 16.3/26 
nominations, 16.3/23 
notices, 16.3/39 
oral contracts, 16.2/2 
paper contracts, 17.1/2 
party details, 16.3/2 
payment procedures, 16.3/11, 
16.5/3
price
, 16.3/9
quality, 16.3/5, 16.3/27
quantity sold/purchased,
16.3/5, 16.3 /8
restrictions, 16.3/31
Sale of Goods Act (1979),
16.2/3, 16.2 /5, 16.3/15, 
16.4/1–3, 17.2/3, 17.4/1 
service of process clauses, 
16.3/43 
signing
, 16.3/3 
sovereign immunity, 16.3/44, 
17.2/21, 17.3 /3, 17.4/5 
taxes, 16.3/34 
termination procedure, 16.3/45 
title and risk, 16.3/14, 17.2/15 
wet contracts, 17.1/2 
see also legislation; regulation 
Contracts (Applicable Law) Act 
(1990), 16.3/40 
controlled foreign corporations 
(CFC), 15.3
/1 
convenience yield, 11.5/4 
long-term oil prices, 11.5 /7 
conversion arbitrage, 9.4/2 
copper strip test, 2.4/4 
corners, 17.3/5 
corporation tax see taxation 
Corpoven, 4.8/11 
correlations, 9.3/5, 11.2/5, 
18.3/9–12 
Cossac
k, 4.7/7 
Cost, Insurance and Freight 
(CIF) contracts, 16.2/3–4, 
16.3
/14, App 16.3/1, 17.2/3 
costs 
of closing positions, 18.4/14 
Supplement 8 May 2002 of credit control, App 13.1/1 
of futures and forward 
contracts, 6.2/3, 8.6/2 
of storage, 9.3 /4 
country risk, 13.2/1 
court judgements, 17.2/19 
crack spreads 
arbitrage, 6.4 /7, 8.2/8
options, 17.3/7
valuation, 18.3/5
see also spreads
credit checks, 13.4/1–6 
credit risk, 13.1
/1–5 
assessment of brokers/trading 
partners, 13.1/2, 13.2/3 
costs of credit control, 
App13.1 /1 
in-house credit monitoring, 
13.4/5 
letters of indemnity, 13.3/4, 
App13.4 /1 
letters of intent, 13.3/5, 
App13.5/1 
long-dated oil market, 11.6
/1 
money at risk, 13.2/1 
open credit, 13.3/1 
parent company guarantees, 
13.3/1 
see also pa
yment methods; risk 
management 
Creditworthy
, 13.4/6 
Crude Oil Washing (COW), 
12.8/1 
crude oils 
API gra
vity, 2.5/2 
blends, 2.5/5 
characteristics, 2.5/1 
condensates and NGLs, 2.5/6 
fractions, 2.5/3 
hydrocarbon chemistry, 2.5/1 
hydrocarbon type, 2.5/3 
measurement, 2.7/1 
oxygen and metals, 2.5/5 
product yield, 2.5/2 
quality, 2.5/5 
sulphur content, 2.5/4 
types of, 2.5/1 
see also quality 
Cupiagua, 4.8 /4

--- Page 946/964 ---
Index
Curlew , 4.2/3 
Cushing Cushion, 4.5/4 
Cushing, Oklahoma, 4.5/2 
Cusiana, 4.8/4, 8.2/3 
Dai Hung, 4.7/9 
daisy chain, 7.2/2, 7.5/3 
Dan, 4.2/11 
Dansk Underground Consortium 
(DUC), 4.2 /11 
Daqing, 4.7/8 
data input errors, 18.5/2 
date of agreement, 16.3/3 
dated cargoes, 4.2/4, 7.3/2 
Dauntless, 4.2/3 
deal inputs and conﬁrmation, 
18.5/1 
deﬁnitions of contract terms
, 
16.3/4 
delivery 
notiﬁcation of
, 16.3/23 
procedures, 6.4/2, 8.3/1–9 
times, 16.3/20 
delta, 18.4 /2 
demand see oil demand 
demurrage, 12.6/1, 16.3/26, 
16.3/27 
Denmark 
export crudes
, 4.2/11 
production, 4.2/11 
density, 2.4 /2 
of oil, 2.4/2 
of water, 2.4/2 
DERD 2494, 5.2 /6, 5.3/12 
derivatives, 1.3 /1, 6.1/1 
liquidity, 11.3/1 
oil warrants, 11.4/1 
pricing long-dated instruments, 
11.5/1 
risk control, 18.1
/1 
royalty trusts, 11.4/1 
synthetic oil ﬁred, 11.4/3 
trading instruments, 11.4/1 
see also futures and forward 
contracts; options; swaps 
Deutsc
he Indstrie Normal (DIN), 
5.2/9 
diesel 
Asia Paciﬁc market, 5.4/11 cetane number, 2.4 /7
EN590, 5.2/9
European market, 5.2/7
sulphur content, 2.4/7
US market, 5.3/8
US speciﬁcations, 5.3/9
discharging cargoes, 12.7/5, 
12.8
/5 
disclosure requirements 
United Kingdom, 14.9/4–6 
United States
, 14.9/1–4 
discounts, 12.3/4 
dispute resolution, 16.3
/40, 
17.2/18 
see also arbitration 
distillation, 2.6/3 
ASTM, 2.4 /3 
Djeno, 4.4/5 
Doctor test, 2.4/4 
documentary letters of credit see 
letters of credit 
documentation, 12.4
/1, 13.3/2, 
14.4/12, 17.2 /12 
Dos Bocas, 4.8/7 
double taxation treaties, 15.1/1, 
15.2/2, 15.2 /6, 15.3/5, 
15.4/5, App 15.1/1 
Douglas, 4.2/6 
Draugen, 4.2/10 
Druzhba pipeline, 4.3/2 
dual purpose kerosine (DPK), 
2.4/6, 5.2 /6, 5.4/9 
Dubai, 4.6 /2, 4.7/3 
crude, 4.6/11, 12.3/6 
forward market, 4.6/11 
forward paper contract, 
7.5/2
production, 4.6
/9, 4.6/11
Dubai market, 7.5 /1 
organisation, 7.5/3 
participants, 7.5/4 
trading volumes, 7.5/1 
DUC blend, 4.2 /11 
Dukhan, 4.6/9 
Dulang, 4.7/6 
Dun and Bradstreet (D&B), 
13.4/2 
Duri, 4.7
/3 
Durward, 4.2/3 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 947/964 ---
Index
duties and taxes, 16.3/34 
see also taxation 
Dynamar BV, 13.4/4 
E4, 5.2 /14 
early termination of positions, 
14.4/10 
Ecopetrol, 4.8
/5 
Ecuador, 4.8/6 
export crudes, 4.8 /6 
production, 4.8/6 
effectiveness requirement, 14.4/6, 
14.7/1 
EFP
, 3.1/2, 3.3/5 
EFS, 3.1/2, 8.3/7 
Egypt 
export crudes, 4.3 /6
ofﬁcial prices, 4.3/6
production, 4.3/5
Ekoﬁsk, 4.2 /10 
electronic trading, 8.6/1–3 
EN590, 5.2/9 
Enel, 5.2/12 
Energy Charter Treaty, 17.2/9 
Energy Compass, 3.5/8 
enterprise risk, 14.4/6 
entire agreement clauses, 16.3/44 
environmental legislation 
pollution, 16.5 /5, 17.2/18
residual fuel oil, 5.3/13
Equatorial Guinea, 4.4 /6 
export crudes, 4.4/6 
production, 4.4/6 
Es Sider, 4.3 /4 
Escalante, 4.8/3 
escalator/de-escalator clause, 
3.2/1 
Escra
vos, 4.4/2 
Esmereldas, 4.8/6 
estimating prices, 18.3/6 
Eurograde, 5.2/2 
Europe 
European Union legislation, 
17.2/6, 17.4/2 
fuel oil market, 5.2
/10 
fuel oil speciﬁcations, 5.2/12 
gasoil market, 5.2/7 
gasoline market, 5.2/2 
gasoline speciﬁcations, 5.2/2 
Supplement 8 May 2002 high sulphur fuel oil market, 
5.2/11
jet kerosine market, 5.2
/5
naphtha market, 5.2/4
oil demand, 5.2/1
product imports, 5.2/1
product markets, 5.2/1
reﬁnery output, 5.2/1
European Association of Oil 
Traders, App 7.5 /2 
European options, 9.2/6, 10.4/5 
European Programme on 
Emissions, Fuels and Engine Technologies, 2.7
 /1 
ex-ship delivery, 16.3/21, 16.3/22 
exchange of futures for swaps 
(EFS), 8.3 /7 
exchange for physicals (EFPs), 
6.4/2, 8.3 /5, 17.3/7 
exercising options, 9.2/6 
express contract terms, 16.3/1–45 
Fao Blend, 4.6 /6 
Far East Oil Price Index (FEOP), 
3.5/9 
F
ateh terminal, 7.5/2 
FCCU, 2.6/9 
Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), 17.3/2 
F
ergus, 4.2/6 
Fife, 4.2/7 
ﬁnal boiling point (FBP), 2.4/3 
Financial Services Act (FSA) 
1986, 7.2 /1, 10.2/10 
Financial Services Authority 
(FSA), 6.2
/4, 7.2/1, 17.4/6, 
17.4/7 
Financial Services and Markets 
Act (2000), 17.4 /6 
ﬁve o’clocking, 7.2/3 
ﬁxed prices, 3.2/1 
ﬂash point, 2.4/3 
Jet A1, 2.4 /5 
ﬂexi-propane, 7.3/10 
ﬂoating prices, 3.3/1 
ﬂoors, 14.6/3 
Flotta, 4.2/8 
Foinaven, 4.2/3, 4.2/8 
Forcados, 4.2/2

--- Page 948/964 ---
Index
force majeure , 16.3/29 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(1977), 17.3/4 
Foreign Judgements Act (1933), 
17.4/5 
Foroozan, 4.6/4 
Forties, 4.2/8, 8.2/3 
18-day, 4.2 /6 
forward contracts see futures and 
forward contracts 
forward markets 
15-da
y Brent, 7.3/1 
Arab Gulf, 7.5/1 
Boston Bingo, 7.4/3, 7.4/4 
cash WTI, 7.4/2 
Colonial Pipeline, 7.4/3 
crude oil, 7.4/1 
daisy chains, 7.2/2 
demurrage charges, 7.2/3 
Dubai crude, 7.5/1 
Europe, 7.3/1 
Far East, 7.5/1 
ﬁve o’clocking, 7.2/3 
fuel oil, 7.3/10 
fuel oil domestique (FOD), 
App7.5/1 
future developments
, 7.6/1 
gasoil, 7.3/9 
method of operation, 7.2/1 
naphtha, 7.3/8, 7.5/4 
organisation, 7.2/2 
paper contracts, 7.1/1 
propane, 7.3/10 
reﬁned products, 7.4/3 
Russian gasoil, App 7.1/1 
sources of price information, 
7.2/5 
spread trading
, 7.2/3 
structure, 7.2/3 
structure and organisation, 
7.2/1
tolerance game
, 7.2/3
United States, 7.4/1
VAT, App 7.2/1, App 7.4/1
forward price curves, 18.3 /6–9 
Frankel, Paul, 2.2/1 
Free on Board (FOB), 16.2/3–4, 
16.3/14, 16.3 /21–2, 16.5/1, 
App16.1 /1, App 16.2/1, App16.1 /1, App16.2/1, 
17.2/2 
freezing point, 
Jet A1, 2.4/5 
Froy, 4.2/9 
FT Energy Economist, 3.5/8 
fuel oil domestique (FOD), 
forward paper contract, App
7.5/1 
fuel oils 
metals content, 2.4
/8 
sulphur content, 2.4/8 
viscosity, 2.4/7 
Fulmar, 4.2 /8 
Furrial, 4.8/11 
futures exchanges, 8.1/2, 
8.2/1–13, 13.1 /2, 17.4/6, 
17.5/1, 18.2/2 
futures and forward contracts, 
1.3/1, 6.1/1 
accounting, 13.1/4, 14.4/1–13, 
14.5/1–3 
alternative delivery procedure 
(ADP), 8.3 /9 
basis risk, 6.4/8 
cash and carry trades, 6.3/4 
clearing houses, 6.2/1, 8.5/1–2 
costs, 6.2/3, 8.6/2 
delivery procedures, 6.4/2, 
8.3/1–9 
Dubai crude
, 12.3/6 
electronic trading, 8.6/1–3 
exchange of futures for swaps 
(EFS), 8.3 /7 
exchange for physicals (EFPs), 
6.4/2, 8.3 /5, 17.3/7
gasoil contracts, 8.2/10
gasoline contracts, 8.2/5
heating oil contracts, 8.2/4
history and development,
8.1/1–7 
liquidity
, 8.1/6, 8.6/3, 18.2/13 
margin payments, 6.2/3, 8.5/2, 
13.1/3, 18.5 /1 
marking to market, 6.2/3, 
13.1/4, 18.5/1 
natural gas contracts, 8.2/6, 
8.2/12
open interest, 8.1
/6
options on futures, 8.4/1–2
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 949/964 ---
Index
paper contracts, 6.4/1, 17.3/8 
physical contracts, 6.4/1 
and the physical market, 6.3/2, 
6.4/2, 6.4 /4 
price curves, 18.3/6–9 
price information, 18.2/1–4 
pricing, 3.5/3, 6.3/1–5 
propane contract, 8.2/7 
quality speciﬁcations, 8.1/5 
regulation, 6.2/4, 17.3/7, 17.4/3, 
17.4/6, 17.4/9 
risk management, 13.1
/3–5 
speculation, 6.4/5 
spreads, 6.4/7, 8.2/8 
squeezes, 6.3/2 
standardisation, 6.2/2 
synthetic contracts, 9.2/12 
Tapis crude, 12.3/7 
taxation, 15.5/2–3 
term structure of deals, 6.3/3, 
18.2/4–9 
trading procedure
, 6.2/1, 6.4/2, 
8.6/1–4 
uses
, 6.4/1 
valuation of trading positions, 
18.3/1–6
volatility of prices
, 8.1/5,
18.2/10–13
West Texas Intermediate
(WTI), 8.2/2, 12.3/6
see also arbitrage; hedging
G30, 13.1 /3 
Gabon 
export cruses
, 4.4/5 
production, 4.4/4 
gamma, 18.4/5 
gasoil 
Asia P
aciﬁc market, 5.4/10 
Asia Paciﬁc speciﬁcations, 
5.4/11 
cold properties
, 2.4/6 
contracts, 8.2/10 
DIN speciﬁcation, 5.2/9 
European market, 5.2/7 
European speciﬁcations, 5.2/7 
forward market liquidity, 
App7.5/1
F
rench, 5.2/9
Supplement 8 May 2002 Russian, 5.2/9
Singapore prices, 5.4/14
gasoline 
ARA barge market, 5.2
/4 
Asia Paciﬁc market, 5.4/3 
benzene content, 5.2/2 
Boston market, 5.3/5 
cargo market, 5.2/3 
Colonial Pipeline market, 5.3/7 
contracts, 8.1/5, 8.2/5 
Eurograde, 5.2/2 
European market, 5.2/2 
Mediterranean market, 5.2/4 
MTBE content, 5.3/17 
NY Harbor market, 5.3/5, 5.3/6 
US Gulf Coast market, 5.3/7 
US market, 5.3/2 
US west coast market, 5.3/18 
GATT, 5.3 /3, 17.2/7 
General Terms & Conditions 
Conoco
, 7.5/2 
Shell, 7.3/1 
Genoa, 5.2 /1 
Gippsland, 4.7/7 
Gorm, 4.2/11 
governing law, 16.3/40 
Greek analysis, 18.4/1–11 
Grifﬁn, 4.7/7 
gross reﬁnery margin (GRM), 
2.6/19 
Group of 
Thirty (G30), 13.1/3 
grouping transactions, 14.4/8 
Gryphon, 4.2/7, 4.2/8 
Gulf of Mexico, production, 4.5/5 
Gulf War, 2.3/1, 7.4/2 
effect on oil prices, 11.5 /6 
Hague–Visby Rules, 16.4 /4, 
17.2/16 
Hamburg Rules
, 17.2/17 
Handil, 4.7/4 
Harding, 4.2/6, 4.2/8 
hardship clauses, 16.3/11 
heating oil 
arbitrage, 6.4 /6
contracts, 8.2/4
European market, 5.2/7
NY Harbor market, 5.3/10
US market, 5.3/8

--- Page 950/964 ---
Index
heavy fuel oil 
forward market liquidity, 
App7.2/1 
forward paper contract, 
App7.2/1 
Heavy Louisiana Sweet (HLS), 
4.5/5 
hedge accounting criteria, 14.3/1, 
14.4/2, 14.6/7 
see also accounting 
hedge funds, 6.4/5 
hedging 
airline hedge, 9.3 /2 
with futures, 6.4/3, 6.4/8, 8.2/9 
with options, 9.3/1, 9.3/2, 9.3/5 
participation hedges, 14.6/4 
physical hedges, 14.8/1–3 
producer hedge, 9.3/1 
reﬁnery margin hedge, 9.3/5 
Heidrun, 4.2 /9, 4.2/10 
HGT (Host Government Take), 
12.1/2 
historical volatility, 9.4/6, 9.4/8, 
18.2/11 
hydro-desulphurisation, 2.6
/6 
hydrocracking, 2.6/10 
hydrotreating, 2.6/6 
Ima, 4.4 /2 
implied contract terms, 16.4/1–6 
implied volatility, 9.4/7, 9.4/10, 
18.2/12, 18.3 /13–15 
in-house credit monitoring, 
13.4/5 
Incoterms
, 16.5/1–3, 17.2/1–2 
Indian Oil Company, 5.4/9 
Indonesia 
export crudes, 4.7 /4
ofﬁcial prices, 4.7/4
production, 4.7/3
Indonesian Crude Price (ICP), 
4.7
/3 
formula, 4.7 /4 
initial boiling point (IBP), 2.4/3 
initial margin, 6.2/3, 8.5/2 
input errors, 18.5/2 
inputting deals, 18.5/1 
inputting market prices, 18.5/2 
inspections, 12.5/1, App 12.1/1 contract clauses, 16.3 /27 
terminal inspections, 12.8 /4 
Institute of Petroleum (IP), 2.4/1 
insurance, 17.2/17 
International Centre for 
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), App
17.1/4 
International Chamber of 
Commerce (ICC), App
17.1/3 
International Energy Credit 
Association (IECA), 13.4 /4 
international law, 17.2/1 
International Petroleum 
Exchange of London (IPE), 8.1/2, 8.1
 /3, 8.2/10–13
arbitration rules, 17.4/8
clearing system, 8.5/1
contracts, 18.2/2
delivery procedures, 8.3/4
electronic trading, 8.6/1
Floor Members, 17.4/8
options trading, 9.1/2
regulation, 17.4/7, 17.4/9
International Sale of Goods 
Convention, 17.2
/5 
International Swaps and 
Derivatives Association (ISDA), 10.2/10 
Internet credit checks, 13.4
 /6 
investment funds, inﬂuence on oil 
market, 11.2 /4 
invoices, 18.5/2, 18.5/3 
IPE see International Petroleum 
Exchange of London (IPE) 
Iran 
Automatic Adjustment 
Factor 
(AAF), 4.6 /4 
crude exports, 4.6/5 
export crudes, 4.6/4 
Mediterranean exports, 4.3/1, 
4.3/8
ofﬁcial prices
, 4.6/4
production, 4.6/3
trade sanctions, 17.2/20
Iranian Heavy, 4.6 /3 
Iranian Light, 4.6/3 
Iraq, 4.3/9 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 951/964 ---
Index
export ban, 4.6/5 
limited oil sales, 4.6/5 
Mediterranean exports, 4.3/1 
production, 4.6/5 
trade sanctions, 17.2/20 
Iraq-Turkey pipeline, 4.3 /9 
irrevocable letters of credit, 
17.2/11 
ISDA Master 
Agreement, 10.2/10 
Isthmus, 4.8/7 
Ivory Coast, 4.4/6 
export crudes, 4.4 /6
production, 4.4/6
Jabiru, 4.7 /7 
Jade, 4.4/6 
Jet A1, 2.4/5, 5.4/8 
jet fuel 
Colonial Pipeline market, 
5.3/12
DERD 2494, 5.2
/6
DERD 2494 speciﬁcations,
5.3/12 
European market, 5.2
/5 
international speciﬁcations, 
5.3/12 
Mediterranean market, 5.2
/7 
US market, 5.3/11 
US speciﬁcations, 5.3/12 
US west coast market, 5.3/20 
jet/kerosine 
Asia P
aciﬁc market, 5.4/8 
Asia Paciﬁc speciﬁcations, 5.4/8 
Singapore prices, 5.4/9 
John S. Herold, 13.4 /3 
Kazakstan, 4.3 /2 
Kern River, 4.5/8 
Kiabo, 4.4/4 
Kirkuk, 4.3/9, 4.6/6 
Kishima, 4.3/7 
Koch Industries, 4.5/3 
Kole, 4.4/6 
Kribi, 4.4/6 
Kutubu Light, 4.7/8 
Kuwait 
export crudes, 4.6 /6
ofﬁcial prices, 4.6/7
production, 4.6/6
Supplement 8 May 2002 Labuan, 4.7/6 
Lagoven, 4.8/11 
Latin America, 4.8/1 
crude exporters, 4.8 /1 
crude prices, 4.8 /3 
Lavan Blend, 4.6/4 
lead compounds, 2.4/4 
legislation 
anti-trust law, 17.3 /2 
banking law, 17.4/4 
Bills of Exchange Act (1882), 
17.2/9, 17.4/4
Bills of Lading 
Act (1855),
17.4/4 
Brussels Convention, 17.4/5 
Carriage of Goods by Sea 
Acts, 
16.4/3–4, 17.4/3
Cla
yton Act (1914), 17.3/3
Commodity Exchange Act,
17.3/1, 17.3/5 
commodity trading la
w, 17.3/5 
competition law, 17.3/2, 17.4/2 
Contracts (Applicable Law) Act 
(1990), 16.3/40 
court judgements
, 17.2/19 
Energy Charter Treaty, 17.2/9 
European Union, 17.2/6, 17.4/2 
Financial Services and 
Markets Act (2000), 17.4 /6 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(1977), 17.3/4 
Foreign Judgements Act (1933), 
17.4/5 
Hague–Visby Rules, 16.4/4, 
17.2/16 
Hamburg Rules
, 17.2/17 
international law, 17.2/1 
International Sale of Goods 
Convention, 17.2/5 
Marine Insurance 
Act (1906), 
17.2/17 
maritime legislation, 16.4/3–4, 
17.2/14 
market manipulation, 17.3
/5 
Merchant Shipping Act (1995), 
16.5/5 
national la
ws, 17.2/19 
Protection of Trading Interests 
Act (1980), 17.4/5

--- Page 952/964 ---
Index
Sale of Goods Act (1979), 
16.2/3, 16.2/5, 16.3/15, 
16.4/1–3, 17.2/3, 17.4/1 
Sherman Act (1890), 17.3/2 
Singapore, 17.5/1–2 
sovereign immunity, 16.3/44, 
17.2/21, 17.3/3 
standardisation of terms
, 
17.2/4 
State Immunity Act (1978), 
17.4/5 
T
exas law, 17.3/5 
trade sanctions, 17.2/20 
Unfair Contract Terms Act 
(1977), 16.4/1–3 
Uniform Commercial Code 
(UCC), 17.3
/1 
Uniform Customs and Practice 
for Documentary Credits
, 
17.2/1, 17.2/11 
United Kingdom, 17.4 /1–10 
United Nations Conventions, 
17.2/4–5
United States
, 17.3/1–10
World Trade Organisation
(WTO) agreements, 17.2
/7 
see also contracts; regulation 
Lennox, 4.2/6 
letters of credit, 12.4/2, 13.3/1, 
App13.2/1, App 13.3 /1,
16.5/3, 17.2/11–14
standby, 13.3/3
letters of indemnity, 12.4 /2, 
App12.3 /1, 13.3/4, 
App13.4 /1 
letters of intent, 13.3 /5, 
App13.5 /1 
liability limitations
, 16.3/37 
Libya 
export crudes, 4.3 /5
ofﬁcial prices, 4.3/4
production, 4.3/4
trade sanctions, 17.2/20
lifting orders, 12.2 /1 
Light Louisiana Sweet (LLS), 
4.5/5, 7.4 /3 
limits, 18.4/13 
Line 63, 4.5/8 Lion, 4.4 /6 
liquidity, 1.3/1, 8.1/6, 8.6/3, 
18.2/13 
bid/offer spread, 11.3/2 
Littlebrook market, 
App7.2/1 
Llanos Basin, 4.8/5 
loading conditions, 16.3/26 
location of proﬁts, 15.1/1, 15.2/7, 
15.3/6 
logistics
, 12.1/1 
Lokele, 4.4/6 
London Clearing House (LCH), 
8.5/1, 18.4/11 
London Court of International 
Arbitration (LCIA), App
17.1/6 
London Oil Reports (LOR), 3.3 /2, 
3.5/4, 3.5 /8 
long hedge, 6.4/4 
long-dated oil market 
administration, 11.6/1 
ceiling sw
ap, 11.7/7 
contractual issues, 11.6/1 
credit risk, 11.6/1 
development of, 11.1/1 
ﬁnancial settlement, 11.7/3 
ﬂoor swap, 11.7/6 
liquidity, 11.3/1 
min-max swap, 11.7/5 
need for master agreement, 
11.6/1 
oil producer
, 11.7/1 
oil warrants, 11.4/1 
participants, 11.2/1 
participation swap, 11.7/9 
price collar, 11.7/8 
pricing, 11.5/1 
role of banks and investment 
houses, 11.2 /2
role of investment funds,
11.2/3 
role of traders
, 11.2/3 
royalty trusts, 11.4/1 
selling a swap, 11.7/4 
stabilizing effect of, 11.8/1 
synthetic oil ﬁelds, 11.4/3 
trading instruments, 11.4/1 
use of derivatives, 11.7/1 
visibility, 11.3/1 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 953/964 ---
Index
long-term oil prices 
behaviour of, 11.5/6 
volatility of, 11.5/6 
Loreto, 4.8 /9 
losses and taxation, 15.2/4, 
15.4/3 
Louisiana Offshore Port (LOOP), 
4.5/6 
low cost collar
, 9.3/7 
Lower Zakum, 4.6/10 
LPG, 2.4/8 
LSWR 
Asia Paciﬁc Market, 5.4 /14 
Asia Paciﬁc spot trade, 5.4/16 
Indonesian, 5.4/14 
Pertamina formula, 5.4/15 
pricing of, 5.4/16 
straight run, 5.4/16 
Lucina, 4.4 /5 
M100, 5.2 /14 
M40, 5.2/14 
MacCulloch, 4.2/3 
Magnus South, 4.2/6 
Malaysia 
export crudes, 4.7 /6
ofﬁcial prices, 4.7/6
production, 4.7/5
Mallard, 4.2 /3 
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 11.5/1 
Mandji, 4.4/5 
Maraven, 4.8/11 
margin payments, 6.2/3, 8.5/2, 
13.1/3, 18.5 /1 
accounting, 14.4/1, 14.7/3 
Marib Light, 4.6
/12 
Marine Insurance Act (1906), 
17.2/17 
maritime legislation, 16.4
/3–4, 
17.2/14 
market manipulation, 17.3
/5 
marking to market, 6.2/3, 13.1/4, 
18.5/1 
Marlim, 4.8
/3 
Mars, 4.5/5 
Masila, 4.6/12 
Maureen, 4.2/7 
Maya, 4.8/7 
M’Bya, 4.4/5 measurement 
meter
, 2.7/1 
tank, 2.7/1 
weight, 2.7/2 
mechanistic valuation, 12.2/3 
Medanito
, 4.8/3 
Mediterranean 
bunker market, 5.2 /12 
crude exports, 4.3/1 
fuel oil market, 5.2/12 
fuel oil prices, 5.2/13 
gasoil market, 5.2/9 
jet kerosine market, 5.2/7 
low sulphur fuel oil market, 
5.2/13
naphtha market, 5.2
/4
producers, 4.3/1
Merchant Shipping Act (1995), 
16.5/5 
Merox treating
, 2.6/5 
Mexico, 4.8/7 
export crudes, 4.8 /7
pricing formulas, 4.8/8
production, 4.8/7
middle distillate 
Boston market, 5.3
/10 
Colonial Pipeline market, 
5.3/11 
US Gulf Coast market, 5.3
/10 
US market, 5.3/8 
US west coast market, 5.3/20 
Middle East 
crude exports
, 4.6/1 
formula pricing, 4.6/1 
production capacity, 4.6/1 
term crude sales, 4.6/1 
Middle East Economic Survey 
(MEES), 3.5 /8 
Midland, Texas, 4.5/3 
Minas, 4.7/3 
Minas crude, direct burning of, 
5.4/15 
Miri, 4.7
/6 
missing tickets, 18.5/3 
modern portfolio theory (MPT), 
11.2/5 
MON
, 2.4/4 
money at risk, 13.2/1 
Monte Carlo simulation, 11.5/1 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 954/964 ---
Index
Moudi, 4.4/6 
MRC Business Information, 
13.4/3 
MTBE, 2.4/5 
US Gulf coast prices, 5.3/18 
US market, 5.3/17 
municipal organisation business, 
13.1/4 
Murban, 4.6
/9 
Murzak, 4.3/5 
naphtha 
ARA market, 5.2
/5 
Asia Paciﬁc market, 5.4/6 
European market, 5.2/4 
forward market liquidity, 
App7.4/1, App 7.4 /2 
forward paper contract, 7.5/5 
Japanese open-spec market, 
7.5/4 
open-spec contract, 
App7.4/1 
open-speciﬁcation market, 
5.4/7, 7.5 /4 
petrochemical, 5.2/4, 5.3/16 
reformer, 5.2/4, 5.3/16 
Singapore prices, 5.4/8 
swaps, 5.2/5 
US Gulf coast prices, 5.3/17 
US market, 5.3/16 
US speciﬁcations, 5.3/16 
naphthenes, 2.5 /3 
national laws, 17.2/19 
National Power, App 7.2/1 
natural gas contracts, 8.2/6, 
8.2/12 
natural gas liquids (NGLs), 2.5
/6 
Nemba, 4.4/3 
netting, 10.2/10 
Neutral Zone, 4.6/2, 4.6/7 
Nevis, 4.2/6 
New York Harbor, 8.1/5 
New York Mercantile Exchange 
see Nymex 
newsletters
, 3.5/8 
Ngo see Ima 
Nigeria 
export crudes, 4.4 /2
ofﬁcial prices, 4.4/2
production, 4.4/1
Ninian, 4.2 /7 
Njord, 4.2/3, 4.2/9 
Nkossa, 4.4/5 
Nomination Scheme, 15.6/1–3 
nominations, 16.3/23 
normal distribution of prices, 
11.5/1 
Norne
, 4.2/3, 4.2/9 
North Sea 
crudes, 4.2 /2
dated market, 4.2/5
market, 4.2/1, 4.2/3
production, 4.2/1
North-West Shelf condensate, 
4.7
/7 
Norway 
export crudes
, 4.2/10 
production, 4.2/9 
Notice of Readiness (NOR), 
16.3/26 
notices
, 16.3/39 
Novorossiysk, 4.3/2 
number 2 heating oil futures, 
8.2/4 
Nymex (New York Mercantile 
Exc
hange), 3.2/3, 8.1/2, 
8.1/3, 8.1/7, 8.2/1–9, 17.3/7 
back-month trading, 11.3 /2
Brent crude, 8.2/7
clearing system, 8.5/1–2
contracts, 18.2/2
delivery procedures, 8.3/2
electronic trading, 8.6/1
Light Sweet Crude futures
contract, 4.5 /1, 8.2/2
natural gas, 8.2/6
number 2 heating oil, 8.2/4
open interest, 11.3/2
options on futures, 8.4/1–2
options trading, 9.1/2
price volatility, 18.2/13
propane, 8.2/7
spreads, 8.2/8
unleaded gasoline, 8.2/5
WTI, 1.3/1
Obando, 4.4 /5 
octane number, 2.4/4 
tests for, 2.4/4 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 955/964 ---
Index
Odessa, 4.3/2 
Odudu, 4.4/2 
off-spec quality, 12.2/4 
Ogwendjo, 4.4/5 
oil 
arguments for investing in, 
11.2/5 
physical market, 1.2
/1 
pipelines, 1.2/2 
reﬁning, 1.2/2 
sampling and testing, 2.7/2 
stocks, 1.2/7 
supply, 1.2/5 
tankers, 1.2/1 
trading characteristics, 1.2/1 
trading unit, 1.2/2 
Oil Buyers Guide, 3.5 /8 
oil demand, 1.2 /4 
Asia Paciﬁc, 5.4/1 
Europe, 5.2/1 
prices, 1.2/5 
seasonality, 1.2/5 
shape of barrel, 2.2/3 
United States, 5.3/1 
oil markets 
crude oil, 1.2
/2 
development of, 1.1/1 
reﬁned products, 1.2/3, 5.1/1 
stability, 1.3/5 
structure, 1.3/4 
trading horizons, 1.3/3 
trading instruments, 1.3/1 
see also product markets 
Oil Price Information Service 
(OPIS), 3.5
/9 
oil prices see prices; pricing 
mechanisms 
oil production 
non-Opec
, 1.2/6 
Opec, 1.2/7 
oil products 
bitumen, 2.4
/8 
blending, 2.6/12 
colour, 2.4/2 
diesel, 2.4/7 
environmental factors, 2.7/1 
EU Directives, 2.7/1 
ﬂash point, 2.4/3 
fuel oils, 2.4/7 
Supplement 8 May 2002 gasoils, 2.4/6
gasolines, 2.4/4
general properties, 2.4/1
kerosines, 2.4/5
LPG, 2.4/8
measurement, 2.7/1
naphthas, 2.4/4
properties of, 2.4/1
special products, 2.4/8
speciﬁc gravity, 2.4/2
speciﬁcations, 2.4/1
sulphur content, 2.4/4
uses of, 2.2/1
volatility, 2.4/3
water content, 2.4/3
oil reﬁning, 2.6 /1 
catalytic cracking, 2.6/9 
catalytic reforming, 2.6/7 
conversion, 2.6/2 
conversion processes, 2.6/7 
costs, 2.6/18 
economics, 2.6/18 
environmental factors, 2.7/1 
fractional distillation, 2.6/3 
hydrocracking, 2.6/10 
hydrotreating, 2.6/6 
joint products, 1.2/10 
margins, 2.6/19 
other separation processes, 
2.6/5 
physical separation, 2.6
/2 
primary distillation, 2.6/4 
thermal cracking, 2.6/8 
treating processes, 2.6/2, 2.6/5 
vacuum distillation, 2.6/5 
yield ﬂexibility, 2.6/17 
see also reﬁneries 
Oil Taxation Ofﬁce (OTO), 15.2 /1 
oleﬁns, 2.5/3 
Olmec, 4.8/7 
Oman, 4.6/2 
export crudes, 4.6 /7
Ministry of Petroleum and
Minerals (MPM), 4.6 /8 
ofﬁcial prices, 4.6/8 
production, 4.6/7 
spot market, 4.6/8 
Opec, 1.2 /6 
open credit, 13.3/1

--- Page 956/964 ---
Index
open interest, 8.1/6 
operations, 18.5/1–4 
options, 1.3/2, 9.1/1–15 
accounting, 14.7/1–4 
American, 9.2/6, 10.4/5 
Asian, 9.2/6, 10.4/5, 18.2/8 
Black-Scholes model, 9.4/11, 
10.4/7, 11.5/1, 18.3/12–13 
call options
, 9.2/1, 9.2/2, 9.2/8, 
9.2/10 
conversion arbitrage
, 9.4/2 
crack spread options, 17.3/7 
delta, 18.4/2 
European, 9.2/6, 10.4/5 
exchange traded, 9.1/1, 9.1/2, 
9.2/4 
exercising
, 9.2/6 
on futures, 8.4/1–2 
gamma, 18.4/5 
Greeks, 18.4/1–11 
and hedging, 9.3/1, 9.3/2, 9.3/5 
historical volatility, 9.4/6, 9.4/8, 
18.2/11 
implied volatility
, 9.4/7, 9.4/10, 
18.2/12, 18.3 /13–15 
intrinsic value, 9.4/3 
low cost collar, 9.3/7 
Nymex crack spread, 8.4/1 
OTC, 10.4/4 
over-the-counter (OTC), 9.1/1, 
9.2/4, 9.2 /5, 18.2/1, 18.2/7, 
18.2/9 
premium paid, 10.4/5 
pricing
, 9.4/1–13, 18.3/12–17 
put options, 9.2/1, 9.2/2, 9.2/9, 
9.2/11 
put-call parity
, 9.4/1 
regulation, 17.3/7 
rho, 18.4/9 
smile curve, 18.2/12, 18.3/15 
strangles, 18.3/4 
synthetic contracts, 9.2/12 
taxation, 15.5/3 
terminology, 9.2/2 
theta, 18.4/8 
time value, 9.4/3 
trading positions, 9.2/7 
uses, 9.3/1–7 valuation of trading positions, 
18.3/1–6 
vega, 18.4
/7 
volatility of prices, 9.4/5–13, 
18.2/10–13, 18.3 /12–17 
zero cost collar, 9.3 /1 
oral contracts, 16.2/2 
Oriente, 4.5/5, 4.5/7, 4.8/6 
Oseberg, 4.2/10, 4.5/5, 8.2/3 
Oso Condensate, 4.4/2 
OSP, 3.2/5 
OTC derivatives, 1.3/2, 9.1/1, 
9.2/4, 9.2 /5, 18.2/1, 18.2/7, 
18.2/9
caps and ﬂoors
, 10.4/4
deﬁnition of, 10.4/5
options, 10.4/4
plain vanilla, 10.4/4
price cap, 10.4/5
price collar, 10.4/4
price ﬂoor, 10.4/5
pricing, 10.4/7
swaption, 10.4/5
OTO, 4.2 /4, 7.2/5, 7.3/4 
outright prices, 3.2/1 
Palanca, 4.4 /4, 4.5/5 
paper contracts, 6.4/1, 7.1/1, 
17.1/2, 17.3 /8 
paper markets, 1.3/1 
Papua New Guinea 
export crudes, 4.7 /8 
production, 4.7 /8 
parafﬁns, 2.5/3 
parent company guarantees, 
13.3/1 
participation hedges
, 14.6/4 
party details, 16.3/2 
payment methods, 13.1/1 
bills of exchange, 17.2 /9
contract clauses, 16.3/11,
16.5/3
see also letters of credit 
PDS On-Line Services
, 3.5/9 
Peat Marwick, 4.7/1 
Pelican, 4.2/6 
Pemex, 4.8/8 
Pennington, 4.4/2 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 957/964 ---
Index
Pertamina, 4.7/3, 5.4/15 
Peru, 4.8 /8 
export crudes, 4.8/9 
production, 4.8/8 
Petroecuador, 4.8 /6 
Petroleos de Venezuela (PdVSA), 
4.8/10 
Petroleum Argus, 3.3/2, 3.5/9, 
7.2/4, 7.2/5, 10.3/10 
Petroleum Intelligence Weekly 
(PIW), 3.5/8 
Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT), 
7.3
/4, 15.2/10, 15.5/1, 
15.6/1–3 
Petronas, 4.7 /5 
Petroperu, 4.8/9 
physical contracts, 6.4/1 
physical hedges, 14.8/1–3 
platforming, 2.6/7 
Platts , 3.3/1, 3.5/1, 3.5/8, 7.2/5, 
18.2/3 
Global Alert, 3.5
/9 
Oilgram News, 3.5/8 
Oilgram Price Report, 3.5/9 
political risk, 13.2 /1 
pollution, 16.5/5, 17.2/18 
PONA, 2.4/5, 2.5/3 
posted prices, 4.5/2 
pour point, 2.4/6 
power utilities 
Europe, 5.2 /11
Japan, 5.4/14
US, 5.2/13
US requirements, 5.3/13
P-plus market, 4.5 /3 
pre-payments, 13.1/1 
price markers, 1.3/1, 1.3/5 
price swap, 3.4/5 
prices 
adjusted for inﬂation, 11.2 /6 
contract clauses, 16.3/9 
convenience yield, 11.5/4 
correlation with other markets, 
11.2/5 
daily reports
, 3.5/8 
differentials, 4.1/1 
estimating unquoted prices, 
18.3/6 forward price curves, 18.3 /6–9 
fundamentals, 1.2/4 
of futures and forward 
contracts, 6.2 /3, 6.3/1 
information on, 3.5/2, 3.5/7, 
18.2/1–4 
inputting market prices
, 18.5/2 
long-term oil prices, 11.2/6, 
11.5/6 
newsletters
, 3.5/8 
normal distribution, 11.5/1 
online services, 3.5/9 
of options, 9.4/1–13, 18.3/12–17 
pitfalls, 3.5/6 
publications, 3.5/7 
published prices, 3.5/4 
relationship between crude and 
products, 2.3 /2 
relative product prices, 2.3/2 
reporting services, 3.5/3 
term structure, 6.3/3, 11.5/4, 
18.2/4–9 
transparency
, 1.3/1 
using price reports, 3.5/5 
volatility, 1.1/1, 8.1/5, 9.4/5–13, 
18.2/10–13, 18.3 /12–17 
pricing mechanisms, 1.2/3, 2.3/1, 
3.1/1 
against a basket, 3.3
/4 
APPI, 3.3/6 
cif, 3.2/4 
credit terms, 3.2/5 
currency, 3.2/2 
differential to futures prices, 
3.3/4 
differential to published prices
, 
3.3/1 
EFP
, 3.3/5 
ﬁxed differential, 3.3/1, 3.3/4 
ﬁxed prices, 3.2/1 
ﬂoating differential, 3.3/4 
ﬂoating prices, 3.3/1 
fob, 3.2/4 
location, 3.2/4 
mean of published prices, 3.3/3 
mechanisms, 3.4/1 
moving averages, 3.3/3 
ofﬁcial selling prices, 3.2/5 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 958/964 ---
Index
posted prices , 3.2/6 forward paper contract, 
price swap, 3.4 /5 App7.3/1 
quality, 3.2 /1 Protection of Trading Interests 
rack prices, 3.2 /7 Act (1980), 17.4/5 
Russian fuel oil, 3.4 /2 Prudhoe Bay Royalty Trust, 
Russian gasoil, 3.4 /1 11.4/1 
sources of information, 3.5 /1 put options, 9.2 /1, 9.2/2, 9.2/9, 
Syrian crude oil, 3.4 /4 9.2/11 
taxes and duties, 3.2 /4 put-call parity, 9.4 /1 
timing, 3.2 /2 
trigger pricing, 3.3 /4 Qatar 
unleaded gasoline, 3.4 /3 export crudes, 4.6 /9 
wholesale prices, 3.2 /7 ofﬁcial prices, 4.6 /9 
see also sw ap pricing production, 4.6 /8 
producer hedge, 9.3 /1 Qatar Land, 4.6 /9 
product imports Qatar Marine, 4.6 /9 
Asia Paciﬁc, 5.4 /1 Qua Iboe, 4.4 /2, 8.2/3 
Europe, 5.2 /1 quality, 8.1 /5, 12.2/3 
United States, 5.3 /1 certiﬁcates, 16.3 /7, 16.3/28 
product markets contract clauses, 16.3 /5, 
Asia Paciﬁc, 5.4 /2 16.3/27 
Europe, 5.2 /1 off-spec quality, 12.2/4 
United States, 5.3 /2 testing, 16.3 /7 
see also oil markets see also inspections 
product speciﬁcations quantity sold/purchased, 16.3 /5, 
Asia Paciﬁc fuel oil, 5.4 /16 16.3/8 
Asia Paciﬁc gasoil, 5.4 /11 
Asia Paciﬁc gasoline, 5.4 /4 Rabi Blend, 4.4 /5 
Asia Paciﬁc jet/kerosine, Rabi Light, 4.4 /4 
5.4/8 Ramsbottom residues, 2.4 /7 
Californian market, 5.3 /18 random walk, 9.4 /7, 11.5/1 
European fuel oil, 5.2 /10 range forwards, 14.6 /4 
European gasoil, 5.2 /7 Ras Budran, 4.3 /6 
European gasoline, 5.2 /2 Ras Fanar, 4.3 /6 
international jet fuel, 5.3 /12 Ras Gharib, 4.3 /6 
US fuel oil, 5.3 /13 recitals, 16.3 /2 
US jet fuel, 5.3 /12 recognised clearing houses 
US naphtha, 5.3 /16 (RCH), 17.4 /6, 17.4/7, 
US vacuum gasoil, 5.3 /16 17.4/9 
product trade, 5.1 /2 recognised investment exchanges 
proﬁts (RIE), 17.4 /6, 17.4/7, 
location of proﬁts, 15.1 /1, 17.4/9 
15.2/7, 15.3/6 reﬁneries, 2.6 /1 
proﬁt & loss reports, 18.5 /2 capacity, 2.6 /2 
recognition, 14.7/2 complex, 2.6 /10 
propane crude distilling, 2.6 /15 
contract, 8.2 /7 environmental factors, 2.7 /2 
forward market liquidity, European output, 5.2 /1 
App7.3/1 ﬂexibility, 2.6 /15 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 959/964 ---
Index
hydroskimming, 2.6/8 
off-plot ﬂexibility, 2.6/17 
organisational ﬂexibility, 2.6/17 
processes, 2.6/2 
secondary processing, 2.6/16 
semi-complex, 2.6/9 
turnarounds, 2.6/2 
United States output, 5.3/1 
see also oil reﬁning 
reﬁnery margin hedge, 9.3 /5 
reﬁnery margins, 8.2/9 
product yields, 2.6/19 
reformulated gasoline (RFG), 
5.3/4, 5.3 /16, 5.3/17
complex model, 5.3/4
simple model, 5.3/4
regulation, 17.1 /1, 18.6/1 
15-day Brent, 14.4/10 
futures and forward contracts, 
6.2/4, 17.3 /7, 17.4/3, 17.4/6, 
17.4/9 
of options
, 17.3/7 
SGX (Singapore Exchange), 
17.5/1–2
of sw
aps, 14.4/10, 17.3/8
see also legislation
Reid vapour pressure (RVP), 
2.4
/3 
representative ofﬁces taxation, 
15.2/2, 15.4/3 
reputation of trading partners, 
13.2/2 
residence and taxation, 15.2/1, 
15.3/4, 15.4/2 
residual fuel oil 
Asia P
aciﬁc market, 5.4/16 
blending for US market, 5.3/14 
cracked, 5.2/10 
E4, 5.2/14 
European low sulphur market, 
5.2/12
European market, 5.2
/10,
5.2/11, 5.2 /12 
European speciﬁcations, 5.2/10 
M100, 5.2/14 
M40, 5.2/14 
Mediterranean bunker market, 
5.2/12
Singapore prices
, 5.2/17
Supplement 8 May 2002 straight run, 5.2/10, 5.2/14 
US market, 5.3/12 
US speciﬁcations, 5.3/13 
US utility demand, 5.3/13 
US west coast market, 5.3/20 
restrictions, 16.3 /31 
Reuters, 3.3/2, 3.5/1, 7.2/5 
revocable letters of credit, 17.2/11 
revolving letters of credit, 17.2/12 
Rhine water levels, 5.2/4 
rho, 18.4/9 
RIM Intelligence, 3.5/9 
Rincon, 4.8/3 
ring fences, 15.5/2 
risk management, 13.1/3–5 
best practice guidelines, 13.1/3 
cash ﬂow risk, 18.1/2, 18.2/9 
country risk, 13.2/1 
Greek analysis
, 18.4/1–11 
limits, 18.4/13 
municipal organisation 
business, 13.1 /4 
political risk, 13.2/1 
reputation of trading partners, 
13.2/2 
risk control units
, 18.1/1, 
18.1/2, 18.5/4 
risk reports, 18.1/1, 18.4/10–11, 
18.6/1 
shoc
k scenarios, 18.4/1, 18.4/11 
Value at Risk (VAR), 18.4/1, 
18.4/12 
see also credit risk 
Robinson P
atman Act (1936), 
3.5/3 
Rome Convention, 16.3/41 
RON
, 2.4/4 
Rotterdam, 5.2/1, 8.1/6 
crude exports, 4.3 /1 
Russian E4, 3.4/3 
Russian fuel oil, 3.4/2 
Russian gasoil, 3.4/1 
forward paper contract,
App
7.1/1
Saharan Blend, 4.3 /3 
Saladin Information Service 
(SIS), 3.5/9 
Saladin Ltd, 10.3/10

--- Page 960/964 ---
Index
Sale of Goods Act (1979), 16.2/3, 
16.2/5, 16.3/15, 16.4/1–3, 
17.2/3, 17.4/1 
Salina Cruz, 4.8/7 
Salomon Brothers Bond Index, 
11.2/6 
San Joaquin Valley (SJV) Heavy, 
4.5/8 
Santa F
e North Pipeline, 5.3/19 
Santa Fe Paciﬁc Pipeline (SFPP), 
5.3/19 
Santa F
e West Pipeline, 5.3/19 
Sarir, 4.3/5 
Saudi Arabia, 1.2/6 
export crudes, 4.6 /2
ofﬁcial prices, 4.6/3
production, 4.6/2
scenarios, 18.4 /1, 18.4/11 
scheduling, 12.2/1, 12.2/3 
Scholes, Myron, 9.4/10 
Securities and Investments 
Board (SIB), 7.2 /1 
seller’s hedge, 6.4/4 
service companies, 15.4/4 
service of process clauses, 16.3/43 
settlement errors, 18.5/3 
SGX (Singapore Exchange), 
17.5/1–2 
Sha
ybah, 4.6/2 
Sherman Act (1890), 17.3/2 
shipping law, 16.4/3–4, 17.2/14 
see also legislation 
shipping operations, 12.7/1–6 
contracts
, 16.2/3–5 
discharging cargoes, 12.7/5, 
12.8/5 
risks and opportunities
, 12.7/1 
single voyages, 12.7/2, 16.2/5 
time charters, 12.7/3, 16.2/4 
trans-shipment, 12.8/3, 12.8/4 
turnaround times, 12.8/1 
vessel arbitrage, 12.7/4 
shock scenarios, 18.4 /1, 18.4/11 
Siberian Light, 4.3/2 
Sidi Kerir, 4.3/1, 4.3/8 
signing contracts, 16.3/3 
silver strip test, 2.4/4 
Simex, heavy fuel oil contract, 
5.4/18 Singapore 
bunker market, 5.4
/17 
fuel oil prices, 5.4/17 
gasoil market, 5.4/14 
gasoil prices, 5.4/14 
gasoline market, 5.4/4 
gasoline prices, 5.4/5 
gasoline swaps, 5.4/5 
jet/kerosine market, 5.4/9 
jet/kerosine prices, 5.4/9 
legislation, 17.5/1–2 
naphtha prices, 5.4/8 
SGX (Singapore Exchange), 
17.5/1–2
spot market, 5.4
/2
taxation, 15.4/1–9
single voyages, 12.7 /2, 16.2/5 
Sirri, 4.6/4 
Skjold, 4.2/11 
Skua, 4.7/7 
Sleipner, 4.2/10 
smile curve, 18.2/12, 18.3/15 
sogo shosha, 7.5/4 
Sonatrach, 4.3/3 
Souedie, 4.3/7 
sovereign immunity, 16.3/44, 
17.2/21, 17.3 /3, 17.4/5 
Soyo, 4.4/4 
speciﬁc gravity (SG), 2.4/2 
bunkers, 2.4 /2 
speciﬁcations see product 
speciﬁcations 
speculation, 6.4
/5 
speculative inventories, 14.8/2 
spot prices, 18.2/3 
spot storage agreements, 
12.8/2 
spread options
, 17.3/7 
spreads, 6.4/7, 7.2/3, 8.2/8, 9.3/5, 
18.3/9–12 
see also crac k spreads 
squeezes, 6.3/2, 17.3/5 
Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 
index, 11.2/6 
standardisation 
of futures and forw
ard 
contracts, 6.2/2 
of legislation, 17.2/4 
standby letters of credit, 13.3/3 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 961/964 ---
Index
State Immunity Act (1978), 
17.4/5 
Statfjord, 4.2
/10 
Statoil, 4.2/10 
Stockholm Chamber of 
Commerce, App 17.1 /2 
stocks 
minops
, 1.2/9 
products, 1.2/9 
seasonality, 1.2/9 
storage, 1.2 /3 
costs, 9.3/4 
spot storage agreements, 12.8/2 
term storage agreements, 
12.8/3 
terminal inspections
, 12.8/4 
terminal management, 12.8/1 
terminal regulations, 12.8/4 
trans-shipment, 12.8/3, 12.8/4 
straight run fuel oil, 5.2 /10 
sulphur content, 5.2 /14 
strangles, 18.3/4 
strips, 4.5/3 
structured deals, 18.3/4 
subsidiary companies, 15.2/4, 
15.4/4 
Suez Blend, 4.3
/6 
sulphur content, 2.4/4 
European gasoil, 5.2 /7 
superior kerosine oil (SKO), 5.4/9 
supply demurrage, 12.6/1 
Suwaydiah, 4.3/7 
swap pricing, 10.3/1 
arbitrage with futures, 10.3 /5 
basis risk, 10.3/8 
cost of hedging, 10.3/1 
credit rating, 10.3/1 
credit risk, 10.3/9 
effect of term structure, 10.3/6 
forward curve, 10.3/6 
long-term price structures, 
10.3/8 
margin required by provider
, 
10.3/1 
replicating with futures
, 10.3/1 
risk premium, 10.3/9 
swap providers, 10.2/12 
sw
aps, 1.3/2, 10.1/1, 18.2/8 
accounting, 14.6/1–7 
Supplement 8 May 2002 Asia Paciﬁc market, 10.4/3 
average price swaps, 14.6/1 
caps, 14.6/3 
ceiling swap, 10.4/8, 11.7/7 
contract, 10.2/1 
deﬁnition of, 10.2/1 
European market, 10.4/1 
exchange of futures for swaps, 
8.3/7 
ﬁxed for ﬂoating
, 10.2/1 
ﬂoors, 11.7/6, 14.6/3 
future developments, 10.5/1 
hedging jet fuel, 10.4/7 
long-term, 10.4/3, 11.3/1 
long-term hedges, 10.2/7 
market structure, 10.2/12 
min-max swap, 11.7/5 
paper Tapis, 10.4/3 
participation hedges, 14.6/4 
participation swap, 11.7/9 
price cap, 10.4/6, 10.4/8 
price collar, 10.4/9, 11.7/8 
price protection, 10.4/4 
price range, 10.4/9 
pricing OTC options, 10.4/7 
producer hedge, 11.7/4 
producer hedge, 1 year, 10.2/3 
producer hedge, 5 year, 10.2/7 
range forwards, 14.6/4 
regulation, 10.2/10, 14.4/10, 
17.3/8 
risk w
arehousing, 10.2/12 
short-term, 10.4/1 
simple, 10.4/7 
Singapore gasoline, 5.4/5 
sources of price information, 
10.3/10 
tailor
-made hedges, 10.2/4 
taxation, 15.5/4 
trading ﬂexibility, 10.2/9 
US market, 10.4/2 
uses of, 10.4/1 
valuation of positions, 18.3/2–4 
swaption, 10.4 /5 
synthetic contracts, 9.2/12 
synthetic oil ﬁelds, 11.4/3 
Syria 
crude oil, 3.4 /4
export crudes, 4.3/7

--- Page 962/964 ---
Index
ofﬁcial prices , 4.3/7 
production, 4.3/6 
Syrian Light, 4.3/7 
spot market, 4.3/7 
Tapis, 4.7/5, 12.3/7, 18.3/9–12 
Asia Paciﬁc marker crude, 
4.7/2 
paper market, 4.1/2 
taxation 
consumer government, 1.2
/5 
contract clauses, 16.3/34 
futures and forward contracts, 
15.5/2–3
location of proﬁts
, 15.1/1,
15.2/7, 15.3/6
Oil Taxation Ofﬁce (OTO),
15.2/1 
of options
, 15.5/3 
Petroleum Revenue Tax (PRT), 
15.2/10, 15.5/1, 15.6/1–3 
Singapore
, 15.4/1–9 
of swaps, 15.5/4 
treaties, 15.1/1, 15.2/2, 15.2/6, 
15.3/5, 15.4/5, App15.1/1 
United Kingdom, 15.2/1–10, 
15.5/1–5
United States
, 15.3/1–7
Value Added Tax (VAT),
15.2/2–5, 15.2/7–9, 15.5/3 
T
eal, 4.2/6 
TEL, 2.4/4 
Tengiz, 4.3/2 
Tengizchevroil (TCO), 4.3/2 
term storage agreements, 
12.8/3 
term structure of prices
, 6.3/3, 
11.5/4, 18.2/4–9 
terminals, 12.2/2 
inspections
, 12.8/4 
management, 12.8/1 
regulations, 12.8/4 
termination of contracts, 16.3 /45 
testing, 16.3/7 
Texas law, 17.3/5 
Thelma, 4.2/6 
thermal cracking, 2.6/8 
theta, 18.4/8 
Thevenard Island, 4.7/7 Thums, 4.5 /8 
Tia Juana Heavy, 4.8/11 
Tia Juana Light, 4.8/11 
time charters, 12.7/3, 16.2/4 
time value, 9.4/3 
title and risk, 16.3/14, 17.2/15 
TML, 2.4/4 
Tokyo Commodity Exchange 
(Tocom), 8.1 /2, 8.2/13 
tolerance game, 7.2/6, App 7.4/2 
Tordis East, 4.2/9 
trade sanctions, 17.2/20 
trading partner analysis, 13.2/3 
trans-shipment, 12.8/3, 12.8/4 
TransAndean pipeline, 4.8/2 
Transnor case, 7.3/3 
transparency of prices, 1.3/1 
transportation, 1.2/1 
see also shipping operations 
treaties
, 15.1/1, 15.2/2, 15.2/6, 
15.3/5, 15.4 /5, App 15.1/1 
Treaty of Rome, 3.5/3 
trigger pricing, 3.3/4 
Trinidad and Tobago, 4.8/9 
production, 4.8 /9 
Troll, 4.2/9, 4.2/10 
Tuapse, 4.3/2 
Tullow Oil, 4.3/7 
Tunisia 
export crudes, 4.3 /8 
production, 4.3 /8 
turnaround times, 12.8/1 
two-stage cracking, 2.6/8 
Tyra, 4.2/11 
Umm Shaif, 4.6 /10 
UN Resolution 986, 4.3/9 
unconﬁrmed letters of credit, 
17.2/11 
Unfair 
Contract Terms Act 
(1977), 16.4/1–3 
Uniform Commercial Code 
(UCC), 17.3/1 
Uniform Customs and Practice 
for Documentary Credits
, 
17.2/1, 17.2/11 
United Arab Emirates (UAE) 
export crudes
, 4.6/10 
production, 4.6/9 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 963/964 ---
Index
United Kingdom 
disclosure requirements, 
14.9/4–6 
export crudes
, 4.2/7 
legislation, 17.4/1–10 
London Clearing House (LCH), 
8.5/1, 18.4 /11 
production, 4.2/6 
taxation, 15.2/1–10, 15.5/1–5 
see also Brent 
United Nations 
arbitration rules
, App 17.1/1 
Conventions, 17.2/4–5 
Hamburg Rules, 17.2/17 
trade sanctions
, 17.2/20 
United States 
California Air Resources Board 
(CARB), 5.3/18 
Clean Air Act (CAA), 5.3/3, 
5.3/9
crude imports
, 4.5/1
crude markets, 4.5/1
disclosure requirements,
14.9/1–4
domestic crudes
, 4.5/2
fuel oil market, 5.3/12
gasoline market, 5.3/2
General Accounting Ofﬁce
Report, 10.2/11 
Gulf Coast, 4.5 /5
bunker market, 5.3/15
MTBE market, 5.3/18
naphtha market, 5.3/17
jet fuel market, 5.3 /11 
legislation, 17.3/1–10 
mid-continent, 4.5/7 
middle distillate market, 5.3/8 
MTBE market, 5.3/17 
naphtha market, 5.3/16 
New York Harbor, 8.1/5 
oil demand, 5.3/1 
P-plus market, 4.5/3 
posted prices, 4.5/2 
product imports, 5.3/1 
product markets, 5.3/2 
production, 4.5/1 
reﬁnery output, 5.3/1 
reformulated gasoline (RFG), 
5.3/4 strips, 4.5 /3 
taxation, 15.3/1–7 
trade sanctions, 17.2/20 
vacuum gasoil market, 5.3/15 
west coast, 4.5/7, 5.3/18 
bunker market, 5.3 /20 
fuel oil market, 5.3/20 
gasoline market, 5.3/18 
jet fuel market, 5.3/20 
jet fuel prices, 5.3/20 
middle distillate market, 
5.3/20 
see also Nymex 
unleaded gasoline futures
, 8.2/5 
Upper Zakum, 4.6/10 
Urals, 4.3/1 
spot market, 4.3 /1 
US 54 grade jet fuel, 5.3/12 
US 55 grade jet fuel, 5.3/12 
vacuum distillation, 2.6 /5 
vacuum gasoil (VGO) 
US market, 5.3
/15 
US prices, 5.3/15 
US speciﬁcations, 5.3/16 
valuation 
of contracts
, 14.4/11, 18.3/1–6 
of crude blends, 12.2/3, 
15.6/2 
V
alue Added Tax (VAT), 15.2/2–5, 
15.2/7–9, 15.5/3 
Value at Risk (VAR), 18.4/1, 
18.4/12 
vanadium, 5.2
/11 
variation margin, 6.2/3, 8.5/2 
Vasconia, 4.8/5 
vega, 18.4/7 
Venezuela, 4.8/9 
export crudes, 4.8 /11 
production, 4.8 /9 
vessel arbitrage, 12.7/4 
Vienna Convention, 16.4/4 
Vietnam 
export crudes, 4.7 /9
production, 4.7/9
volatility of prices, 1.1 /1, 8.1/5, 
9.4/5–13, 18.2/10–13, 
18.3/12–17 
voyage charters, 12.7/2, 16.2/5 
Supplement 8 May 2002

--- Page 964/964 ---
Index
Wandoo, 4.7/7 
warranties, 16.3/6 
warrants, 11.4/1 
water content, 2.4/3 
West Africa 
crude market, 4.4/1
crude producers, 4.4/1
West Texas Intermediate (WTI), 
4.5
/1, 4.5/5, 4.6/2, 4.7/3, 
7.4/1, 8.2/2, 12.3/6, 
18.2/5–7, 18.3/7, 18.3/9–12 
cash market, 4.5 /2
Light Sweet Crude, 8.2/2
liquidity, 18.2/13
Midland, 7.4/2
West Texas Sour (WTS), 4.5 /5, 
7.4/2 
wet contracts
, 17.1/2 
Widuri, 4.7/3 World Trade Organisation 
(WT
O), 5.3/3, 17.2/7 
Yemen 
export crudes
, 4.6/12 
ofﬁcial prices, 4.6/13 
production, 4.6/12 
Yme, 4.2 /10, 4.2/9 
YPF, 4.8/1 
Zaafarana, 4.3 /6 
Zaﬁro, 4.4/6 
Zaire, 4.4/6 
export crudes, 4.4 /6 
production, 4.4 /6 
Zarzaitine, 4.3/3, 4.3/8 
Zeit Bay, 4.3/6 
zero cost collar, 9.3/1 
Zuetina, 4.3/5 
Supplement 8 May 2002